@summary
since their emergence over 200,000 years ago, modern humans have established communities all over the planet. but they didn't do it alone. whatever corner of the globe you find humans in today, you're likely to find another species as well: dogs. so how did one of our oldest rivals, the wolf, evolve into man's best friend? david ian howe traces the history of humanity's first domesticated animal. [directed by cabong studios, narrated by addison anderson, music by vadeco schettini].
@article
Since their emergence  over 200,000 years ago, modern humans have established  homes and communities all over the planet. But they didn’t do it alone. Whatever corner of the globe you find  homo sapiens in today, you’re likely to find another  species nearby: Canis lupus familiaris. Whether they’re herding, hunting,  sledding, or slouching the sheer variety of domestic  dogs is staggering. But what makes the story of man’s  best friend so surprising is that they all evolved from a creature often seen as one of our oldest rivals: Canis lupus, or the gray wolf.When our Paleolithic ancestors first  settled Eurasia roughly 100,000 years ago, wolves were one of their main rivals  at the top of the food chain. Able to exert over 300 lbs. of pressure  in one bone crushing bite and sniff out prey more than a mile away, these formidable predators didn’t have  much competition. Much like human hunter gatherers, they lived and hunted  in complex social groups consisting of a few nuclear families, and used their social skills to  cooperatively take down larger creatures. Using these group tactics, they operated as effective  persistence hunters, relying not on outrunning their prey, but pursuing it to the point  of exhaustion.But when pitted against the similar strengths of their invasive new neighbors, wolves found themselves at a crossroads. For most packs, these bourgeoning bipeds represented  a serious threat to their territory. But for some wolves, especially those without a pack, human camps offered new opportunities. Wolves that showed less aggression towards humans could come closer to their encampments, feeding on leftovers. And as these more docile scavengers  outlasted their aggressive brethren, their genetic traits were passed on, gradually breeding tamer wolves in areas near human populations.Over time humans found a multitude of uses for these docile wolves. They helped to track and hunt prey, and might have served as sentinels to guard camps and warn of approaching enemies. Their similar social structure made it easy to integrate with human families and learn to understand their commands. Eventually they moved from the fringes  of our communities into our homes, becoming humanity’s  first domesticated animal.The earliest of these Proto Dogs or Wolf Dogs, seem to have appeared around  33,000 years ago, and would not have looked all that  different from their wild cousins. They were primarily distinguished  by their smaller size and a shorter snout full of  comparatively smaller teeth. But as human cultures and occupations  became more diverse and specialized, so did our friends. Short stocky dogs to herd livestock  by nipping their heels; elongated dogs to flush badgers  and foxes out of burrows; thin and sleek dogs for racing; and large, muscular dogs for guard duty. With the emergence of kennel clubs and  dog shows during England’s Victorian era, these dog types were standardized  into breeds, with many new ones bred  purely for appearance. Sadly, while all dog breeds are the  product of artificial selection, some are healthier than others. Many of these aesthetic characteristics  come with congenital health problems, such as difficulty breathing  or being prone to spinal injuries.Humanity’s longest experiment  in controlled evolution has had other side effects as well. Generations of selection for tameness have favored more juvenile  and submissive traits that were pleasing to humans. This phenomenon of selecting traits  associated with youth is known as neoteny, and can be seen in many domestic animals. Thousands of years of co evolution  may even have bonded us chemically. Not only can canines understand  our emotions and body language, but when dogs and humans interact, both our bodies release oxytocin; a hormone commonly associated with  feelings of love and protectiveness.It might be difficult to fathom how every Pomeranian, Chihuahua, and Poodle are descended from fierce wolves. But the diversity of breeds today  is the result of a relationship that precedes cities, agriculture, and even the disappearance  of our Neanderthal cousins. And it’s heartening to know that given enough time, even our most dangerous rivals  can become our fiercest friends.