@summary
the year is 1676, and a treaty has officially ended hostilities between the polish-lithuanian commonwealth and the ottoman empire. despite a serene sunset on the dnipro river, the mood is tense for the zaporozhian cossacks. renowned as one of europe's most formidable military forces, they are in the midst of a power struggle. alex gendler outlines a day in the life of a cossack soldier. [directed by wow-how studio, narrated by addison anderson, music by stephen larosa].
@article
Despite a serene sunset  on the Dnipro river, the mood is tense for the  Zaporozhian Cossacks. The year is 1676, and the Treaty of  Żurawno has officially ended hostilities between the Polish Lithuanian Commonwealth and the Ottoman Empire. But as Stepan and his men ride  towards their stronghold, peace is far from their minds.Having made their home in the Wild Fields  north of the Black Sea, these cossacks— derived from a Turkic  word for "free man"— are renowned as one of Europe’s most  formidable military forces. Composed of hunters, fishermen,  nomads and outlaws, the Cossacks found freedom in these  fertile unclaimed lands. Yet this freedom has proven increasingly  difficult to maintain. Their decades long strategy of shifting  alliances between Poland and Moscow has led to the partitioning  of their lands. In a desperate bid to reclaim independence and reunite the fractured Cossack state, their most recent leader, hetman Petro  Doroshenko allied with the Ottoman Empire. This alliance successfully freed the  Zaporozhian Cossacks in the west from Polish dominion, but  their victory was a bitter one. Doroshenko’s Ottoman allies  ravaged the countryside, carrying off peasants into slavery. And outrage at allying with Muslims  against fellow Christians cost him any remaining local support. Now, with Doroshenko deposed and exiled, the Cossacks are at odds, disagreeing  on what their next move should be.Until then, Stepan must keep order. With his musket and curved saber,  he cuts an imposing figure. He surveys his battalion of 180 men. Most are Orthodox Christians  and speak a Slavic language that will become modern Ukrainian. But there are also Greeks, Tatars,  and even some Mongolian Kalmyks, many with different opinions  on recent events. Officially, all of Stepan’s men have  sworn to uphold the Cossack code by undergoing seven years of military  training and remaining unmarried. In practice, some are part timers, holding more closely to their own traditions, and maintaining families in nearby  villages, outside Cossack lands.Thankfully, the tenuous peace is not  broken before they reach the Sich— the center of Cossack military life. Currently located at Chortomlyk, the Sich’s location shifts with  the tide of military action. The settlement is remarkably well  organized, with administrative buildings, officers’ quarters, and even schools,  as Cossacks prize literacy. Stepan and his men make their way  to the barracks where they live and train alongside several other  battalions or kurins, all of which make up a several  hundred man regiment.Inside, the men dine on dried fish,  sheep’s cheese, and salted pork fat— along with plenty of wine. Stepan instructs his friend Yuri to  lighten the mood with his bandura. But before long, an argument  has broken out. One of his men has raised  a toast to Doroshenko. Stepan cuts him off. The room is silent until he raises  his own toast to Ivan Sirko, the new hetman who favors an alliance  with Moscow against the Turks. Stepan plans to support him, and  he expects his men to do the same.Suddenly, one of Sirko’s men rushes in, calling an emergency Rada,  or general council meeting. Stepan and the others make their  way towards the church square— the center of Sich life. Ivan Sirko welcomes the confused  crowd with exciting news— scouts have located a large Ottoman  camp completely vulnerable on one side. Sirko vows that tomorrow, they will  ride against their common enemy, defend the Cossacks’ autonomy,  and bring unity to the Wild Fields. As the men cheer in unison, Stepan is relieved at their renewed  sense of brotherhood.Over the next 200 years, these  freedom fighters would take on many foes. And tragically, they would eventually become the  oppressive hand of the Russian government they once opposed. But today, these 17th century Cossacks are remembered for their spirit of  independence and defiance. As the Russian painter  Ilya Repin once said: “No people in the world held freedom,  equality, and fraternity so deeply.”