@summary
the 40 or so muscles in the human face can be activated in different combinations to create thousands of expressions. but do these expressions look the same and communicate the same meaning around the world regardless of culture? is one person's smile another's grimace? sophie zadeh investigates. [ted-ed animation by estúdio bacuri]
@article
The 40 or so muscles in the human face  can be activated in different combinations to create thousands of expressions. But do these expressions look the same and communicate the same meaning around the world, regardless of culture? Is one person’s smile another’s grimace?Charles Darwin theorized that emotional  expression was a common human feature. But he was in the minority. Until the mid 20th century, many researchers believed  that the specific ways we show emotion were learned behaviors  that varied across cultures. Personality theorist Silvan Tomkins  was one of the few to insist otherwise. Tomkins claimed that certain affects— emotional states and their associated  facial expressions— were universal.In the 1960s, psychologist Paul Ekman  set about testing this theory by examining hundreds  of hours of film footage of remote tribes isolated  from the modern world. Ekman found the native peoples’  expressions to be not only familiar, but occurring in precisely  the situations he would expect. Conversely, he ran tests with tribes who had no prior exposure to Western culture. They were able to correctly match photos of different facial expressions with stories designed  to trigger particular feelings. Over the next few decades, further research has corroborated Darwin’s idea that some of our most important emotional expressions are in fact universal. The degrees of expression appropriate  to a given situation can, however, vary greatly across cultures.For instance, researchers  have studied facial expression in people who are born blind, hypothesizing that  if expressions are universal, they would be displayed  in the same way as sighted people. In one study, both blind  and sighted athletes displayed the same expressions of emotion when winning or losing their matches.Further evidence can be found  in our evolutionary relatives. Comparisons of facial expression between humans and non human mammals have found similarities in the structure  and movement of facial muscles. Chimpanzee laughter  looks different from ours, but uses some of the same  muscle movements.Back in the 60s, Ekman identified  six core expressions. Anger is accompanied by lowered eyebrows drawn together, tense and narrowed eyes, and tight lips; disgust, by the lips pulled up and the nose crinkling. In fear, the upper white of the eyes  are revealed as the eyebrows raise and the mouth stretches open, while surprise looks similar, but with rounded eyebrows  and relaxed lips. Sadness is indicated by the inner corners  of the eyebrows being drawn inwards and upwards, drooping eyes, and a downturned mouth. And of course there’s happiness: lips drawn up and back, and raised cheeks causing wrinkling  around the eyes. More recently, researchers  have proposed additional entries such as contempt, shame, and disapproval, but opinions vary  on how distinct boundaries between these categories can be drawn.So if Ekman and other researchers  are correct, what makes certain expressions universal? And why are they expressed  in these particular ways? Scientists have a lot of theories rooted  in our evolutionary history. One is that certain expressions  are important for survival. Fear and surprise could signal  to others an immediate danger. Studies of humans and some other primates have found that we pay more attention  to faces that signal threats over neutral faces, particularly when we’re already  on high alert.Expressions also could  help improve group fitness by communicating our internal states  to those around us. Sadness, for example, signals to the group that something’s wrong. There’s some evidence that expressions might be even more directly linked  to our physiology. The fear expression, for instance, could directly improve survival  in potentially dangerous situations by letting our eyes absorb more light and our lungs take in more air,  preparing us to fight or flee.There’s still much research to be done  in understanding emotional expression, particularly as we learn more about  the inner workings of the brain. But if you ever find yourself  among strangers in a strange land, a friendly smile could go a long way.