@summary
your timing made you and your partner infamous bank robbers. now, you need to use that timing to break out of jail. your partner is about to flash you a signal, and exactly 45 seconds later the electric fence circuit will short out. then you notice that your watch is broken, and all you have are two 1-minute fuses in your pocket. can you time your escape and get free? dan finkel shows how. [directed by artrake studio, narrated by addison anderson].
@article
Your timing made you and your partner the most infamous bank robbers  in the west. Now, you’ll need to use that timing  to help you break out of jail. At the appointed time, you’ll be walking  in the yard near the electric fence. Your partner will flash you the signal, and exactly 45 seconds later, short out the fence circuit. It’ll automatically restart  after a second or two, but as long as you move fast, you’ll be home free.And then you notice, to your horror, that your watch is broken, and there’s no time to fix it. The signal is coming, and if you make even a small mistake  in counting off 45 seconds, you’ll get fried.Searching your pockets, you find something that might help: a lighter and two fuses you made earlier  in the prison work program. Each fuse is a length of flammable twine, built to be lit on either end  and burn for precisely one minute. The problem is that even though  the fuses look uniform, they don’t burn evenly, so if you cut one in half, for example, one side might burn longer than the other.Your partner is going to give  the signal any minute, and you’ll have to make your move. How can you use the fuses and lighter  to time exactly 45 seconds?Pause the video to figure it out yourself. Answer in 3 Answer in 2 Answer in 1The length of the fuse may  not tell you anything, but you do know the fuses take exactly 60 seconds to burn from end to end. Here’s the key insight: If you start a fuse on one side  and it burns for 30 seconds, there’ll still be 30 seconds of fuse left. If you had started it from the other end, it would’ve reached the exact  same spot in thirty seconds. That means that if you lit it  from both ends simultaneously, it would burn out in precisely 30 seconds.But how will you time the last fifteen?That’ll have to come from the second fuse. If it were a 30 second fuse, you’d be able to use that same trick again to double the burning speed and  make it last exactly 15 seconds. And, you realize, you can  shorten the second fuse by lighting one end of it at the same time as you light the first. At the moment the first burns out, you’ll be left with 30 seconds  on the second fuse.Just when you’ve got this all figured out, you see the signal from your partner, and spring into action. You gather the four ends of the two  fuses and light three of them. The moment the first burns out, you light the other end  of the second fuse. When it flickers and dies, you know that exactly 45  seconds have passed, and the electric fence is dead. By the time it hiccups back to life, you’re over the fence and home free.