@summary
cuando empez칩 a usar una silla de ruedas, rosario perazolo masjuan sigui칩 siendo la misma, pero la manera en la que maneja el mundo cambi칩. ahora esta activista trabaja para transformar la realidad en la que vivimos para que esta refleje una sociedad m치s inclusiva y accesible para todos.
@article
Right now, the majority of you are wondering something. "What happened to her?" "Why is she in a wheelchair?" I think, subconsciously, people are hoping that I will talk about it. That I say what it is, tell them about it, open up about it. But the truth is, I've already had enough of it. I've had enough of everyone asking me. I've had enough of explaining it to everyone. So what I've decided to do lately is to start making things up. Every time someone has asked what happened, I make up a completely different story. Like I was attacked by a shark, I jumped off a cliff and survived. Or one time, a little boy asked me what had happened, and, very dramatically, I look at him and say to him, "I'm just doing a social experiment to see how people react when confronted with a wheelchair." Very surprised, he looks at me and says, "No way. Really? Let me see. Stand up." The experiment was completely ruined. (Laughter) I believe the problem is not that people are interested in knowing why I am in a wheelchair, that's just simply curiosity. I believe the problem is that they ask me about it before asking my name. For me, starting to use a wheelchair was like discovering a new world. A world that, in reality, was always there. Everyone sees it, but not everyone is familiar with it. For me, it was like a change of outlook, a change of routine. Just like any other big change that can occur in your life, whether it's, I don't know, having a kid, moving to another house, losing a loved one, or changing jobs, it's adapting to a new routine. I didn't stop doing things; I learned to do things differently. I believe   For me, it was like a change in perspective, really. I went from seeing the world from 5' 7" to seeing it from the average height of an 8 year old kid. The whole world started to be at a different height too. Mirrors, most of all. In 99% of mirrors, the only thing I can see is my forehead. And I come up to here. (Laughter) I discovered that there are things that are made for people like me. When I started to use a wheelchair, I stopped using the women's bathroom. I started going to a third bathroom, that bathroom that's made for people like me. I stopped entering places where everyone else went in, because most times the main entrances are not accessible. And the entrances for people like me are around the corner, the side door, through the utility room or the garage. I discovered the power of a ramp. For me, accessibility literally means opportunity. Whether or not there is a ramp up on the other side of the street, for me, means whether I can or can't cross over. But we live in a world where sometimes not many such opportunities exist. I had to change schools once I started using a wheelchair: the school I'd been attending my whole life had not been adapted in a way that would allow me to keep going to it. Also, one of the things I found the most difficult were the looks. When you're in a wheelchair and you go down the street, everyone is going to look at you. It's inevitable. You can't avoid someone noticing you went out today without combing your hair. You can't avoid not greeting someone that you don't feel like greeting. Everyone is going to look at you, or, on the other hand, avoid looking at you. But one of the things that still surprises me the most is that, sometimes, it's as if I feel the world is trying to save me. It's as if, subconsciously, I go down the street, and people give me saint cards. They invite me to pray to the saints. They recommend doctors. Or they feel the need to give me a message of support. Like, "Everything's going to be fine," (Laughter) "you can do it, if you really want to," (Laughter) or they congratulate my friends for being my friends. (Laughter) I don't get it. (Applause) I believe   Often I don't know how to react to these things because I know people indubitably do it with the best of intentions, But it makes me wonder what a wheelchair is associated with. What the big picture is. Yes, I am in a wheelchair, but ... I'm fine. I'm not worried about my life. I don't want anyone to come and save me. To me, one of the greatest ironies is that it doesn't matter where I am, what I'm doing, whom I'm with, whether I'm in a nightclub dancing the cumbia, people look at me ... and think, "Wow, what genius!" (Laughter) "Wow, what an inspiration!" (Laughter) "What an example!" (Laughter) I could be a serial killer who kills people at night, but, to the world, I'm an example. (Applause) And that makes me wonder: "Why do people train, study, take such great pains to be someone in life?" Better to buy a wheelchair; you become exemplary automatically. (Applause) Sometimes disability is like a taboo. Words are used to name that which is not named. When I sat myself in a wheelchair, automatically, to the world, I became a special person. I became an angel. I became a being of light. (Laughter) And I also came to have different capabilities. I've never really understood these different capabilities, because, I don't want to disappoint them, but I can't fly. (Laughter) I don't have superpowers. I believe the only way I'm differently abled to all of you is that I have a horn. (Horn) (Applause) I don't think any of you have a horn. A disability does not make you better or worse than anyone else. For me, getting used to a wheelchair was a process. A long process. But I always think that it would have been easier if I had met with an environment that had already been adapted, and for it not to have been me who had to adapt to the environment. Everything would have been easier if disability wasn't a taboo or a bad word. If people didn't think being in a wheelchair meant something was wrong. If being able to get a job, using a public convenience, or getting on a bus, did not have to be a privilege. Everything would be easier if people with disabilities could indeed be examples, could indeed be inspirations, but for their ideas, for their talents, for their passions; not for the mere fact that crossing the street is a challenge. I want to live in a world in which I can come here, I can talk to you for an hour about whatever, about whichever, and be able to leave here without any of you still wondering why, with everything that she said, she at no point told us why she is in a wheelchair. Thank you. (Applause)