@summary
can someone's political identity actually affect their ability to process information? the answer lies in a cognitive phenomenon known as partisanship. while identifying with social groups is an essential and healthy part of life, it can become a problem when the group's beliefs are at odds with reality. so how can we recognize and combat partisanship? jay van bavel shares helpful strategies. [directed by patrick smith, narrated by addison anderson].
@article
In 2013, a team of researchers  held a math test. The exam was administered  to over 1,100 American adults, and designed, in part, to test  their ability to evaluate sets of data. Hidden among these math problems  were two almost identical questions. Both problems  used the same difficult data set, and each had one objectively  correct answer. The first asked about the correlation  between rashes and a new skin cream. The second asked about the correlation  between crime rates and gun control legislation.Participants with strong math skills were much more likely  to get the first question correct. But despite being  mathematically identical, the results for the second question  looked totally different. Here, math skills  weren’t the best predictor of which participants answered correctly. Instead, another variable the researchers  had been tracking came into play: political identity. Participants whose political beliefs aligned with a correct interpretation  of the data were far more likely  to answer the problem right. Even the study’s top mathematicians were 45% more likely  to get the second question wrong when the correct answer  challenged their political beliefs.What is it about politics that inspires  this kind of illogical error? Can someone’s political identity  actually affect their ability to process information? The answer lies in a cognitive phenomenon that has become increasingly visible  in public life: partisanship.While it’s often invoked  in the context of politics, partisanship is more broadly defined  as a strong preference or bias towards any particular group or idea. Our political, ethnic, religious,  and national identities are all different forms of partisanship. Of course, identifying with social groups is an essential and healthy part  of human life. Our sense of self is defined not only by  who we are as individuals, but also by the groups we belong to. As a result, we’re strongly motivated  to defend our group identities, protecting both our sense of self  and our social communities.But this becomes a problem  when the group’s beliefs are at odds with reality. Imagine watching your favorite sports team commit a serious foul. You know that’s against the rules, but your fellow fans  think it’s totally acceptable. The tension between  these two incompatible thoughts is called cognitive dissonance, and most people are driven to resolve  this uncomfortable state of limbo. You might start to blame the referee,  complain that the other team started it, or even convince yourself  there was no foul in the first place. In a case like this, people are often more motivated  to maintain a positive relationship with their group  than perceive the world accurately.This behavior  is especially dangerous in politics. On an individual scale, allegiance to a party allows people  to create a political identity and support policies they agree with. But partisan based cognitive dissonance  can lead people to reject evidence that’s inconsistent with the party line  or discredits party leaders. And when entire groups of people revise  the facts in service of partisan beliefs, it can lead to policies  that aren’t grounded in truth or reason.This problem isn’t new— political identities  have been around for centuries. But studies show  that partisan polarization has increased dramatically  in the last few decades. One theory explaining this increase is the trend towards clustering  geographically in like minded communities. Another is the growing tendency  to rely on partisan news or social media bubbles. These often act like echo chambers, delivering news and ideas  from people with similar views.Fortunately, cognitive scientists  have uncovered some strategies for resisting this distortion filter. One is to remember that you’re probably  more biased than you think. So when you encounter new information, make a deliberate effort  to push through your initial intuition and evaluate it analytically. In your own groups, try to make  fact checking and questioning assumptions a valued part of the culture. Warning people that they might have been  presented with misinformation can also help. And when you’re trying  to persuade someone else, affirming their values  and framing the issue in their language can help make people more receptive.We still have a long way to go before  solving the problem of partisanship. But hopefully, these tools  can help keep us better informed, and capable of making evidence based  decisions about our shared reality.