@summary
given a range of integers from 0 to 100, what would the whole number closest to 2/3 of the average of all numbers guessed be? for example, if the average of all guesses is 60, the correct guess will be 40. the game is played under conditions known to game theorists as "common knowledge:" every player has the same information— they also know that everyone else does too. lucas husted explains. [directed by anton trofimov, narrated by addison anderson].
@article
A few months ago we posed a challenge  to our community. We asked everyone: given a range of  integers from 0 to 100, guess the whole number closest to 2/3  of the average of all numbers guessed. So if the average of all guesses is 60,  the correct guess will be 40. What number do you think was the  correct guess at 2/3 of the average?Let’s see if we can try and reason  our way to the answer. This game is played under conditions known to game theorists as common knowledge. Not only does every player have  the same information — they also know that everyone else does, and that everyone else knows that  everyone else does, and so on, infinitely. Now, the highest possible average would  occur if every person guessed 100. In that case, 2/3 of the average  would be 66.66. Since everyone can figure this out, it wouldn’t make sense to guess  anything higher than 67.If everyone playing comes to  this same conclusion, no one will guess higher than 67. Now 67 is the new highest  possible average, so no reasonable guess should be  higher than ⅔ of that, which is 44. This logic can be extended further  and further. With each step, the highest possible  logical answer keeps getting smaller. So it would seem sensible to guess the  lowest number possible.And indeed, if everyone chose zero, the game would reach what’s known  as a Nash Equilibrium. This is a state where every player has  chosen the best possible strategy for themselves given  everyone else playing, and no individual player can benefit  by choosing differently.But, that’s not what happens  in the real world. People, as it turns out, either aren’t  perfectly rational, or don’t expect each other  to be perfectly rational. Or, perhaps, it’s some combination  of the two.When this game is played in  real world settings, the average tends to be somewhere  between 20 and 35. Danish newspaper Politiken ran the game  with over 19,000 readers participating, resulting in an average of roughly 22,  making the correct answer 14. For our audience, the average was 31.3. So if you guessed 21 as 2/3 of  the average, well done.Economic game theorists have a  way of modeling this interplay between rationality and practicality  called k level reasoning. K stands for the number of times a  cycle of reasoning is repeated. A person playing at k level 0 would  approach our game naively, guessing a number at random without  thinking about the other players. At k level 1, a player would assume  everyone else was playing at level 0, resulting in an average of 50,  and thus guess 33. At k level 2, they’d assume that everyone  else was playing at level 1, leading them to guess 22. It would take 12 k levels to reach 0.The evidence suggests that most  people stop at 1 or 2 k levels. And that’s useful to know, because k level thinking comes into  play in high stakes situations. For example, stock traders evaluate stocks not only based on earnings reports, but also on the value that others  place on those numbers. And during penalty kicks in soccer, both the shooter and the goalie decide  whether to go right or left based on what they think the other  person is thinking. Goalies often memorize the patterns of  their opponents ahead of time, but penalty shooters know that  and can plan accordingly. In each case, participants must weigh  their own understanding of the best course of action against how  well they think other participants understand the situation.But 1 or 2 k levels is by no means  a hard and fast rule— simply being conscious of this tendency  can make people adjust their expectations. For instance, what would happen  if people played the 2/3 game after understanding the difference between the most logical approach and the most common? Submit your own guess at what 2/3  of the new average will be by using the form below, and we’ll find out.