@summary
in 1948, spanish ophthalmologist jose ignacio barraquer moner was fed up with glasses. he wanted a solution for blurry vision that fixed the eye itself, without relying on external aids. the surgery he eventually devised was called "keratomileusis," and his technique focused on reshaping the cornea— what we now know as lasik. so how does laser eye surgery actually work? dan reinstein explains. [directed by hype cg, narrated by addison anderson].
@article
In 1948, Spanish ophthalmologist  Jose Ignacio Barraquer Moner was fed up with glasses. He wanted a solution for blurry  vision that fixed the eye itself, without relying on external aids. But the surgery he eventually devised  was not for the faint of heart. Barraquer began by slicing off the front of a patient’s cornea and dunking it in liquid nitrogen. Using a miniature lathe, he ground the  frozen cornea into the precise shape necessary to focus the patient’s vision. Then he thawed the disc, and sewed  it back on. Barraquer called this procedure  keratomileusis, from the Greek words for “carving”  and “cornea.” And though it might sound grisly,  his technique produced reliable results. So how did Barraquer’s surgery work?Keratomileusis corrects what are called  refractive errors: imperfections in the way the eye focuses  incoming light. Ideally, the cornea and lens work  together to focus light on the surface of the retina, but several kinds of refractive errors  can impair this delicate system. In people with myopia,  or short sightedness, a steep cornea focuses light just short  of the retina. Those with hyperopia, or far sightedness,  have the opposite problem: light is focused too far  beyond the retina. And in people with astigmatism,  the cornea has two different curvatures which focus light at two distances and  produce blurry vision. Even those with perfect vision will  eventually suffer from presbyopia, or “aging eyes.” As the proteins in the lens age, they  slowly increase its size. By an adult’s mid 40’s, the lens is too large to easily change shape and shift focus.Glasses and contact lenses bend light  to compensate for these refractive errors. But, as Barraquer’s procedure shows, we can also alter the shape  of the cornea itself; moving the focal point backwards,  forwards, or pulling a divided image together. And thankfully, modern eye surgeons can  sculpt the cornea with far less invasive tools.In corrective laser eye surgery, surgeons  rely on excimer lasers. These tools are accurate enough to etch  words into a human hair. To safely accomplish these  ultra fine incisions, they use a technique called photoablation. This allows the laser to essentially  evaporate organic tissue without overheating  surrounding eye tissue.So how does laser eye surgery  actually work? The first step is to separate a thin layer from the front of the cornea. This can be done with either a flat,  wide blade, or a femto second laser that produces millions of tiny plasma  bubbles to create a plane beneath  the corneal surface. Surgeons then lift the flap to expose the  inside of the cornea. Guided by the refractive error and the  shape of the cornea, the excimer laser robotically sculpts the exposed corneal bed into the correct shape. This process usually takes less than 30  seconds for each eye. Finally, the flap is closed, and its edges reseal themselves  in just a few hours.Because the lasering is done on  the eyeball itself, it’s described as “in situ,” or “on site.” Its complete name is “laser in situ  keratomileusis” – but you probably know it as LASIK. Essentially, this technique carves a  patient’s contact lens prescription onto their cornea. Like any surgical procedure, LASIK comes with certain risks. Some patients experience slightly blurred vision that can’t be corrected by glasses. But the technique is currently about  as likely to damage your eyes as wearing daily disposable contact  lenses for one year.Today, a technique called SMILE enables  surgeons to sculpt the cornea through even smaller incisions – further reducing recovery time. And lasers aren’t just correcting the  three types of refractive errors – this technology can also  restore aging eyes. In a technique called Laser  Blended Vision, surgeons adjust one eye to be slightly  better at distance vision and the other to be better  at close range vision. The difference between the two eyes is  small enough that most patients can merge their vision, allowing both eyes to work  together at all distances.Advances in laser technology continue  to make vision correction surgery more effective and accessible. One day soon, Barraquer’s vision of a  world without glasses may finally come true.