@summary
when a new pathogen emerges, our bodies and healthcare systems are left vulnerable. and when this pathogen causes the outbreak of a pandemic, there's an urgent need for a vaccine to create widespread immunity with minimal loss of life. so how quickly can we develop vaccines when we need them most? dan kwartler describes the three phases of vaccine development. [directed by good bad habits, narrated by jack cutmore-scott, music by landon trimble / playdate audio].
@article
When a new pathogen emerges, our bodies and healthcare systems are left vulnerable. In times like these, there’s an urgent need for a vaccine to create widespread immunity with minimal loss of life. So how quickly can we develop vaccines when we need them most?Vaccine development can generally  be split into three phases. In exploratory research, scientists  experiment with different approaches to find safe and replicable  vaccine designs. Once these are vetted in the lab,  they enter clinical testing, where vaccines are evaluated  for safety, efficacy, and side effects across a variety of populations. Finally, there’s manufacturing, where vaccines are produced  and distributed for public use.Under regular circumstances, this process takes an average of 15 to 20 years. But during a pandemic,  researchers employ numerous strategies to move through each stage  as quickly as possible.Exploratory research is perhaps  the most flexible. The goal of this stage  is to find a safe way to introduce our immune system  to the virus or bacteria. This gives our body the information it needs to create antibodies capable of fighting a real infection. There are many ways to safely trigger this immune response, but generally, the most effective  designs are also the slowest to produce.Traditional attenuated vaccines  create long lasting resilience. But they rely on weakened viral strains that must be cultivated in non human tissue over long periods of time. Inactivated vaccines take  a much faster approach, directly applying heat, acid, or radiation to weaken the pathogen. Sub unit vaccines, that inject  harmless fragments of viral proteins, can also be created quickly. But these faster techniques produce less robust resilience.These are just three  of many vaccine designs, each with their own pros and cons. No single approach is guaranteed to work, and all of them require  time consuming research. So the best way to speed things up  is for many labs to work on different models  simultaneously. This race to the finish strategy produced the first testable  Zika vaccine in 7 months, and the first testable COVID 19 vaccine in just 42 days. Being testable doesn’t mean  these vaccines will be successful. But models that are deemed safe  and easily replicable can move into clinical testing while other labs continue exploring alternatives.Whether a testable vaccine is produced in four months or four years, the next stage is often the longest and  most unpredictable stage of development. Clinical testing consists of three phases, each containing multiple trials. Phase I trials focus on the intensity  of the triggered immune response, and try to establish that the vaccine  is safe and effective. Phase II trials focus on determining  the right dosage and delivery schedule across a wider population. And Phase III trials determine safety across the vaccine’s primary  use population, while also identifying rare side effects and negative reactions.Given the number of variables  and the focus on long term safety, it’s incredibly difficult to speed up  clinical testing. In extreme circumstances,  researchers run multiple trials within one phase at the same time. But they still need to meet  strict safety criteria before moving on. Occasionally, labs can expedite  this process by leveraging previously approved treatments. In 2009, researchers adapted  the seasonal flu vaccine to treat H1N1— producing a widely available vaccine in just six months. However, this technique only works when dealing with familiar pathogens that have well established  vaccine designs.After a successful Phase III trial,  a national regulatory authority reviews the results and approves  safe vaccines for manufacturing. Every vaccine has a unique blend  of biological and chemical components that require a specialized pipeline  to produce. To start production as soon  as the vaccine is approved, manufacturing plans must be designed in parallel to research and testing. This requires constant coordination between labs and manufacturers, as well as the resources to adapt to sudden changes in vaccine design— even if that means scrapping months of work.Over time, advances in exploratory research and manufacturing should make this process faster. Preliminary studies suggest  that future researchers may be able to swap genetic material from different viruses into the same vaccine design. These DNA and mRNA based vaccines could dramatically expedite all three stages of vaccine production. But until such breakthroughs arrive, our best strategy is for labs  around the world to cooperate and work in parallel  on different approaches. By sharing knowledge and resources, scientists can divide and conquer  any pathogen.