@summary
as the sun rises, something royal stirs inside a pile of firewood. it's the wasp queen; one of thousands who mated in late autumn and hibernated through the winter. now she must emerge into the spring air to begin her reign. this queen is the lone survivor of her old hive, and now, she must become the foundress of a new one. kenny coogan details a year in the life of a wasp queen. [directed biljana labovic, animated by denis chapon, narrated by addison anderson, music stephen larosa].
@article
As the April sun rises  on a pile of firewood, something royal stirs inside. This wasp queen is one of thousands  who mated in late autumn and hibernated through the winter. Now she emerges into the spring air  to begin her reign.Most of her sisters weren’t so lucky. While hibernating in compost piles  and underground burrows, many sleeping queens  were eaten by spiders. Warm winters caused by climate change  led other queens to emerge early, only to find there was no available food. And some queens that survived the winter  fell victim to the threats of spring, such as carnivorous plants, birds,  and manmade pesticides. Our queen is the lone survivor  of her old hive, and now, she must become  the foundress of a new one.But first, breakfast. The queen heads for a citrus grove  full of honeybee hives. The bees can be dangerous if provoked, but right now they’re paralyzed  by the morning cold. Their hairy bodies are dripping  with sugar water from an earlier feeding, and the resourceful queen  licks them for a morning snack.Newly energized, our queen searches  for a safe nesting area. This tree hollow, safe from rain, wind,  and predators, is ideal. She chews the surrounding wood  and plant fibers to make a paper like pulp. Then she builds around 50 brood cells  that comprise the beginning of her nest. Using sperm stored from last fall, the queen lays a fertilized egg  into each cell, producing as many as 12 in 20 minutes. Within a week,  these will hatch into female larva. But until then, the queen must hunt down  smaller insects to feed her brood, all while expanding the hive, laying eggs, and defending against intruders. Fortunately, our queen is well prepared. Unlike bees, wasps can sting as many times as they need to.With such a busy schedule,  the queen barely has time to feed herself. Luckily, she doesn’t have to. When she feeds an insect to her grubs, they digest the bug into a sugary  substance that sustains their mother. By the end of July, these first larva  have matured into adult workers, ready to take on foraging,  building, and defense. The queen can now lay eggs full time, sustaining herself on her worker’s spoils  and their unfertilized eggs.Although each worker only lives  for roughly 3 weeks, the queen’s continuous egg laying  swells their ranks. In just one summer,  the nest reaches the size of a basketball, supporting thousands of workers. Such a large population needs to eat, and the nearby garden  provides a veritable buffet. As the swarm descends,  alarmed humans try to swat them. They even fight back with pesticides  that purposefully poison wasps, and inadvertently impact  a wide range of local wildlife. But the wasps are actually vital  to this ecosystem. Sitting at the top  of the local invertebrate food chain, these insects keep spiders, mites,  and centipedes, in check. Wasps consume crop eating insects, making them particularly helpful  for farms and gardens. They even pollinate fruits and vegetables, and help winemakers  by biting into their grapes and jump starting fermentation.This feast continues until autumn,  when the foundress changes course. She begins grooming some eggs  into a new generation of queens, while also laying unfertilized eggs that will mature into reproductive males  called drones. This new crop of queens and males  requires more food. But with summer over,  the usual sources run dry, and the foraging wasps  start taking more aggressive risks.By September,  the hive’s organization deteriorates. Hungry workers no longer clean the nest  and various scavengers move in. Just when it seems  the hive can no longer sustain itself, the fertile queens and their drones  depart in a massive swarm.As the days grow colder,  the workers starve, and our queen  reaches the end of her lifespan. But above, a swarm of reproductive wasps  has successfully mated. The males die off shortly after, but the newly fertilized queens are ready  to find shelter for their long sleep. And this woodpile looks like  the perfect place to spend the winter.