@summary
have you ever considered crickets, houseflies or grasshoppers for a dinner menu? in this fun and easily digestible talk, science educator renata di tullio makes a case for bugs as nutritious and sustainable food sources. 
@article
I'm passionate about insects for two reasons. For one, I'm mad about the infinite diversity of this kind of little beings. 30 million; not of insects but of species. We say that humans invented the wheel. But dung beetles would move balls of dung way before we would even think of  standing up straight. "Humans invented compost." Ants would make compost long before any ecologist would in their balcony. And just in case you used to think that we have invented air conditioning you are absolutely wrong. Of course, termites did it before. And there are bugs  that serve as thermometers. Here you are: the crickets. The more they crick, the higher the ambient temperature. It obviously varies with the species, but it's quite accurate. And these are just some facts about four insects. Figure this multiplied by 30 million! Incredible! (Laughter) Besides, insects are delicious. (Laughter) And this is the second thing I wanted to talk to you about. (Applause) When I was 11 years old, I was eating a hamburger at a fast food restaurant when a kid approaches me and says: "Do you know that hamburgers are made of insects?" Hold on for a second! Are insects edible? I later found out that the hamburgers thing was a myth but at the time it kept me wondering and I started searching. And in effect, not only insects are edible but they have a lot of advantages to them. Compared specially with agriculture and the livestock industry, they create more food in less space and using less natural resources. A grass fed cow needs, give or take one hectare to move. Whereas insects don't need more place than what they already take. Now, if you feed that cow 8 kg of food, it will generate 1 kg of meat; approximately an 8 to 1 ratio. If I feed the 8 kg of food to insects they will generate 4 kg: a 8 to 4 ratio. Besides, insects in general have more protein per 100 g than cows. For instance, crickets have  22 percent more protein. And if this was not enough, the livestock industry is responsible for the release of 37 percent methane due to human activities that contributes to the greenhouse effect. And, guess what? Insects create in between  10 and 100 time less methane than, say, pork. Great, well, but if insects are so cool why don't we have them in the market shelves? Precisely, for the faces I saw in most of you when I ate a cricket. We don't have it in mind here, but in the world today, 2 billion people eat insects on daily basis. As Latinamericans we used to as well, until not so long ago — Our pre Columbian diet was made of an important variety of insects: ant larvae, worms, crickets, etc. Until the Spaniards came in and put the same face you just put. Probably, when you think about eating an insect, you will imagine yourselves biting a cockroach like this or cutting with your knife a tarantula this big, but you need not to worry. A product that's becoming widespread is insect flour. It has all the benefits I mentioned before plus, you don't even realize you are eating crickets in a slice of bread. So, how can we get the most of what insects can give to us? In 2017, we went to Chile with a group of friends. We attended the first Latinamerican Summit for Young Leaders in Biotech. There we introduced and idea I think it can work. We suggested creating insects to produce food with added value in urban areas as a way to solve the problem of the lack of space and the cost of resources. We did this thinking that if we youngsters don't tear down cultural barriers, nobody will do it. In fact, we are already doing this regarding genders. And also in Latinamerica the production of food is a neural part of our economy and we cannot stay behind amidst these changes. And to do this it's not required a huge warehouse or a big investment. For instance, I try to contribute in my own house breeding insects, studying how to cook them and transform them so they can be more edible. And if they look at insects beyond our preconceptions? What if we see them as thermometers, or as great inventors, and also as food? Nature provides with a solution that is profitable, viable and sustainable. And it's even delicious! Let's grab this chance and try to change the lens we look to insects with. (Applause)