@summary
in 1928, scientist alexander fleming returned to his lab and found something unexpected: a colony of mold growing on a petri dish he'd forgotten to place in his incubator. and around this colony of mold was a zone completely and surprisingly clear of bacteria. what was this mysterious phenomenon? allison ramsey and mary staicu detail the discovery of penicillin and how it transformed medicine. [directed by wow-how studio, narrated by susan zimmerman].
@article
London, 1928: a group of mold spores  surf a breeze through a lab. They drift onto a petri dish,  and when they land, they germinate a medical revolution. This lab belongs to Alexander Fleming,  a Scottish scientist investigating the properties  of infectious bacteria. At this time,  Fleming is away on vacation. When he returns, he finds  a colony of mold growing on a petri dish he’d forgotten to place in his incubator. And around this colony of mold  is a zone completely and unexpectedly  clear of bacteria.In studying this mysterious phenomenon, Fleming came to realize that the mold  was secreting some kind of compound that was killing the bacteria. The mold was a species  in the Penicillium genus, so Fleming dubbed  the antibacterial compound “penicillin.”What Fleming stumbled upon  was a microbial defense system. The penicillium mold  constantly produces penicillin in order to defend itself from threats, such as nearby bacterial colonies  that might consume its resources. Penicillin destroys  many types of bacteria by disrupting synthesis  of their cell walls. These walls get their strength  from a thick, protective mesh of sugars and amino acids, that are constantly being  broken down and rebuilt. Penicillin binds to one of the compounds  that weaves this mesh together and prevents the wall from being  reconstructed at a critical phase. Meanwhile, penicillin stimulates  the release of highly reactive molecules that cause additional damage. Eventually, the cell’s structure  breaks down completely. This two pronged attack  is lethal to a wide range of bacteria, whether in petri dishes,  our bodies, or elsewhere. It’s not, however,  harmful to our own cells, because those don’t have cell walls.For a decade or so  after Fleming’s discovery, penicillin remained  a laboratory curiosity. But during World War II, researchers figured out how to isolate  the active compound and grow the mold in larger quantities. They then went on to win  the Nobel Prize for their work. Teams at Oxford and several American  drug companies continued development, and within a few years  it was commercially available. Penicillin and similar compounds quickly  transformed the treatment of infections. For the time being, they remain some of the most important,  life saving antibiotics used in medicine.However, the more we use any antibiotic,  the more bacteria evolve resistance to it. In the case of penicillin, some bacteria produce compounds  that can break down the key structure that interferes with cell wall synthesis. As antibiotic use has increased, more and more bacteria  have evolved this defense, making these antibiotics ineffective against a growing number  of bacterial infections. This means it’s essential that doctors  not overprescribe the drug.Meanwhile, 5 to 15% of patients  in developed countries self identify as allergic to penicillin, making it the most commonly reported  drug allergy. However, the vast majority— over 90%— of people who think they’re allergic  to penicillin actually are not. Why the misperception? Many patients acquire the allergy label  as children, when a rash appears after they’re treated  for an infection with penicillin or closely related drugs. The rash is often blamed on penicillin, while the more likely culprit  is the original infection, or a reaction between the infection  and the antibiotic. However, genuine penicillin allergies, where our immune systems  mistake penicillin for an attacker, do occur rarely  and can be very dangerous. So if you think you’re allergic  but don’t know for sure, your best bet is to visit an allergist. They’ll complete an evaluation  that’ll confirm whether or not you have the allergy.Even if you do have a penicillin allergy, your immune cells that react to the drug  may lose their ability to recognize it. In fact, about 80% of people  who are allergic to penicillin outgrow their allergy  within ten years. This is great news for people  who currently identify as allergic to penicillin; the drug may one day save their lives,  as it has done for so many others.