@summary
isabella baumfree was born into slavery in late 18th century new york. fleeing bondage with her youngest daughter, she renamed herself sojourner truth and embarked on a legendary speaking tour. she became known as an electrifying orator and her speeches impacted thousands of people in communities across the united states. daina ramey berry details the life of the outspoken activist. [directed by wow-how studio, narrated by christina greer, music by stephen larosa].
@article
In early 1828, Sojourner Truth approached the Grand Jury of Kingston, New York. She had no experience  with the legal system, no money, and no power  in the eyes of the court. Ignoring the jury’s scorn, Truth said she was there to fight for custody of her five year old son Peter, who’d been illegally sold  to an enslaver in Alabama. As the trial played out  over the next several months, Truth raised funds,  strategized with lawyers, and held her faith. Finally in the spring of 1828,  Peter was returned to her care— but Truth’s work was far from over. She would dedicate  the rest of her life to pursuing justice and spiritual understanding.Truth was born into slavery  as Isabella Baumfree in the late 18th century in Ulster County, New York. Although New York state had announced  the abolition of slavery in 1799, the emancipation act was gradual. Those who were currently enslaved were forced to serve a period of  indentured servitude until their mid 20s.Throughout this period,  enslavers repeatedly sold Baumfree, tearing her from her loved ones. Often, she was explicitly prevented  from pursuing new relationships. Eventually, she married an enslaved man  named Thomas, with whom she had three children. She was desperate to keep  her new family together— but the slow progress of abolition  threatened this hope. Baumfree’s enslaver, John Dumont,  had promised to free her by 1826. When he failed to keep his word,  Baumfree fled for her safety. During the escape, she was only able  to rescue her youngest daughter Sophia, while her other children  remained in bondage. It would be two years before  she regained custody of Peter. After that, she would wait  another two years before she saw any of her other children.During this time,  Baumfree found solace in her faith and became increasingly dedicated  to religious reflection. After settling in Kingston, New York, she joined a Methodist community  that shared her political views. She continued her practice of speaking  aloud to God in private, and one night, her evening prayers took on even more sacred significance. Baumfree claimed to hear the voice  of God, telling her to leave Kingston, and share her holy message with others. Though she never learned to read or write, Baumfree became known  as an electrifying orator, whose speeches drew on  Biblical references, spiritual ideals,  and her experience of slavery. Her sermons denounced the oppression  of African Americans and women in general, and became prominent in campaigns  for both abolition and women’s rights. In 1843, she renamed herself  Sojourner Truth and embarked on a legendary  speaking tour.Truth saw her journey  as a mission from God. Her faith often led her  to the nation’s most hostile regions, where she spoke to bigoted audiences  as the only Black woman in the crowd. Truth was confident God would protect her, but some crowds responded  to her bravery with violence. During one of her sermons, a mob of white men threatened to set  fire to the tent where she was speaking. In her memoir, Truth recalled steeling  herself to confront them: “Have I not faith enough to go out  and quell that mob… I felt as if I had three hearts! And that they were so large,  my body could hardly hold them!” She placated the men with song and prayer, until they had no desire to harm her.Truth’s speeches impacted thousands of people in communities across the nation, but her activism went far beyond public speaking. During the Civil War, she became involved with the Union Army, recruiting soldiers and organizing  supplies for Black troops. Her work was so well regarded that  she was invited to meet President Lincoln. She took the occasion to argue  that all formerly enslaved people should be granted land by the government.Truth continued to travel  and speak well into her 80s. Until her death in 1883,  she remained an outspoken critic who fought for her right to be heard  in a hostile world. As Truth once said, “I feel safe even in the midst of my enemies; for the truth is powerful  and will prevail."