@summary
the royal couple of haiti rode into their coronation to thunderous applause. after receiving his ornate crown, henry christophe ascended his throne, towering 20 meters in the air. but little did the cheering onlookers know that the first king of haiti would also be its last. who was this revolutionary? marlene daut details how a man enslaved at birth rose through the ranks to become king. [directed by cabong studios, narrated by bethany cutmore-scott, music by matheus wittmann].
@article
The royal couple of Haiti rode into their  coronation to thunderous applause. After receiving his ornate  crown and scepter, Henry Christophe ascended his throne,  towering 20 meters in the air. But little did the cheering onlookers  know that the first king of Haiti would also be its last.Enslaved at birth on the  island of Grenada, Christophe spent his childhood being  moved between multiple Caribbean islands. Just 12 years old in 1779, he accompanied his master to aid the  American revolutionaries in the Battle of Savannah. This prolonged siege would be Christophe’s first encounter with violent revolution.There are few surviving written records about Christophe’s life immediately  after the war. Over the next decade, we know he worked as a mason  and a waiter at a hotel in the French colony of Saint Domingue,  as Haiti was then known. In 1791, when the colony’s  slaves rose up in rebellion, Christophe got another opportunity  to fight for freedom. Led by Toussaint Louverture, the rebels  fought against plantation owners, as well as British and Spanish forces  seeking control of the island. Christophe quickly rose  through the ranks, proving himself the equal of more  experienced generals.By 1793, Louverture had successfully liberated  all of Saint Domingue’s enslaved people, and by 1801 he’d established the  island as a semi autonomous colony. But during this time, Napoleon Bonaparte  had assumed power in France, and made it his mission to restore  slavery and French authority throughout the empire. French attempts to reinstate slavery  met fierce resistance, with General Christophe even  burning the capital city to prevent military occupation. Finally, the rebellion and an  outbreak of yellow fever forced French soldiers to withdraw—  but the fight was not without casualties. Louverture was captured,  and left to die in a French prison; a fate that Christophe’s nine year old son would share only a few years later.Following the revolution, Christophe and generals Jean Jacques  Dessalines and Alexandre Pétion rose to prominent positions  in the new government. In 1804, Dessalines was proclaimed  the emperor of independent Haiti. But his desire to hold exclusive power  alienated his supporters. Eventually, Dessalines’ rule incited  a political conspiracy that ended in his assassination in 1806. The subsequent power struggle led to a  Civil War, which split the country in two. By 1807, Christophe was governing as  president of the north in Cap Haïtien, and Pétion was ruling the south  from Port au Prince.Pétion tried to stay true to the  revolution’s democratic roots by modeling his republic after  the United States. He even supported anti colonial  revolutionaries in other nations. These policies endeared  him to his people, but they slowed trade and economic growth.Christophe, conversely, had more  aggressive plans for an independent Haiti. He redistributed land to the people, while retaining state control of agriculture. He also established trade with  many foreign nations, including Great Britain and  the United States, and pledged non interference  with their foreign policies. He even built a massive Citadel in case  the French tried to invade again. To accomplish all of this, Christophe  instituted mandatory labor, and to strengthen his authority,  he crowned himself king in 1811. During his reign, he lived in an  elegant palace called Sans Souci along with his wife and their  three remaining children.Christophe’s kingdom oversaw rapid  development of trade, industry, culture, and education. He imported renowned European  artists to Haiti’s cultural scene, as well as European teachers, in order  to establish public education. But while the king was initially  popular among his subjects, his labor mandates were an  uncomfortable reminder of the slavery Haitians fought to destroy. Over time, his increasingly authoritarian  policies lost support, and his opponents to the south  gained strength. In October 1820, his reign finally  reached its tragic conclusion. Months after a debilitating stroke  left him unable to govern, key members of his military  defected to southern forces. Betrayed and despondent,  the king committed suicide.Today, the traces of Christophe’s  complicated history can still be found in the crumbling  remains of his palaces, and in Haiti’s legacy as the first nation  to permanently abolish slavery.