@summary
in 2012, a team of researchers set a world record, transmitting 1 petabit of data— that's 10,000 hours of high-def video— over a fifty-kilometer cable, in a second. this wasn't just any cable. it was a souped-up version of fiber optics, the hidden network that links our planet and makes the internet possible. what is fiber optics and how does it work? sajan saini explores the vital technology. [directed by artrake studio, narrated by addison anderson].
@article
In 2012, a team of Japanese and Danish researchers set a world record, transmitting 1 petabit of data— that’s 10,000 hours of high def video— over a fifty kilometer cable, in a second. This wasn’t just any cable. It was a souped up version  of fiber optics— the hidden network that links our planet and makes the internet possible.For decades, long distance communications  between cities and countries were carried by electrical signals, in wires made of copper. This was slow and inefficient, with metal wires limiting data rates  and power lost as wasted heat. But in the late 20th century, engineers mastered a far superior method of transmission. Instead of metal, glass can be carefully melted and  drawn into flexible fiber strands, hundreds of kilometers long  and no thicker than human hair. And instead of electricity, these strands carry pulses of light,  representing digital data.But how does light travel within glass,  rather than just pass through it? The trick lies in a phenomenon known  as total internal reflection. Since Isaac Newton’s time, lensmakers and scientists have  known that light bends when it passes between air and  materials like water or glass. When a ray of light inside glass hits its  surface at a steep angle, it refracts, or bends  as it exits into air. But if the ray travels at a shallow angle, it’ll bend so far that it stays trapped, bouncing along inside the glass. Under the right condition, something normally transparent to light can instead hide it from the world.Compared to electricity or radio, fiber optic signals barely degrade  over great distances— a little power does scatter away, and fibers can’t bend too sharply, otherwise the light leaks out. Today, a single optical fiber carries many wavelengths of light, each a different channel of data. And a fiber optic cable contains hundreds  of these fiber strands. Over a million kilometers of cable  crisscross our ocean floors to link the continents— that’s enough to wind around the  Equator nearly thirty times.With fiber optics, distance hardly limits data, which has allowed the internet to evolve into a planetary computer. Increasingly, our mobile work and play rely on legions  of overworked computer servers, warehoused in gigantic data centers  flung across the world. This is called cloud computing, and it leads to two big problems: heat waste and bandwidth demand. The vast majority of internet traffic  shuttles around inside data centers, where thousands of servers are connected  by traditional electrical cables. Half of their running power  is wasted as heat. Meanwhile, wireless bandwidth demand  steadily marches on, and the gigahertz signals used in our  mobile devices are reaching their data delivery limits.It seems fiber optics has been too good for its own good, fueling overly ambitious cloud and mobile computing expectations. But a related technology, integrated  photonics, has come to the rescue.Light can be guided not  only in optical fibers, but also in ultrathin silicon wires. Silicon wires don’t guide light as well as fiber. But they do enable engineers to shrink all the devices in a hundred kilometer  fiber optic network down to tiny photonic chips that plug into servers and convert their electrical signals  to optical and back. These electricity to light chips allow for wasteful electrical cables in data centers to be swapped out for  power efficient fiber.Photonic chips can help break open  wireless bandwidth limitations, too. Researchers are working to replace mobile gigahertz signals with terahertz frequencies, to carry data thousands of times faster. But these are short range signals: they get absorbed by moisture in the air, or blocked by tall buildings. With tiny wireless to fiber photonic  transmitter chips distributed throughout cities, terahertz signals can be relayed over  long range distances. They can do so via a stable middleman, optical fiber, and make hyperfast  wireless connectivity a reality.For all of human history, light has gifted us with sight and heat, serving as a steady companion while we explored and settled the physical world. Now, we’ve saddled light with information and redirected it to run along a fiber optic superhighway— with many different integrated  photonic exits— to build an even more expansive,  virtual world.