@summary
in 1995, the british medical journal published a report about a builder who accidentally jumped onto a nail, which pierced straight through his steel-toed boot. he was in such agonizing pain that any movement was unbearable. but when the doctors took off his boot, they discovered that the nail had never touched his foot at all. what's going on? joshua w. pate investigates the experience of pain. [directed by artrake studio, narrated by addison anderson].
@article
In 1995, the British Medical Journal published an astonishing report  about a 29 year old builder. He accidentally jumped  onto a 15 centimeter nail, which pierced straight through  his steel toed boot. He was in such agonizing pain that even  the smallest movement was unbearable. But when the doctors took off his boot,  they faced a surprising sight: the nail had never touched  his foot at all.For hundreds of years, scientists thought that pain was  a direct response to damage. By that logic, the more severe an injury  is, the more pain it should cause. But as we’ve learned more about  the science of pain, we’ve discovered that pain and tissue  damage don’t always go hand in hand, even when the body’s threat signaling  mechanisms are fully functioning. We’re capable of experiencing severe pain  out of proportion to an actual injury, and even pain without any injury, like the builder, or the well documented  cases of male partners of pregnant women experiencing pain during the pregnancy or labor.What’s going on here? There are actually two phenomena at play: the experience of pain, and a biological  process called nociception. Nociception is part of the nervous  system’s protective response to harmful or potentially harmful stimuli. Sensors in specialized nerve endings detect mechanical, thermal,  and chemical threats. If enough sensors are activated, electrical signals shoot up the nerve  to the spine and on to the brain. The brain weighs the importance  of these signals and produces pain if it decides  the body needs protection. Typically, pain helps the body  avoid further injury or damage. But there are a whole set of factors  besides nociception that can influence the experience of pain— and make pain less useful.First, there are biological factors that  amplify nociceptive signals to the brain. If nerve fibers are activated repeatedly, the brain may decide they need  to be more sensitive to adequately protect the body  from threats. More stress sensors can be  added to nerve fibers until they become so sensitive that  even light touches to the skin spark intense electrical signals. In other cases, nerves adapt to send signals more  efficiently, amplifying the message. These forms of amplification   are most common in people experiencing  chronic pain, which is defined as pain lasting  more than 3 months. When the nervous system is nudged  into an ongoing state of high alert, pain can outlast physical injury. This creates a vicious cycle in which  the longer pain persists, the more difficult it becomes to reverse.Psychological factors clearly  play a role in pain too, potentially by influencing nociception and by influencing the brain directly. A person’s emotional state, memories, beliefs about pain and expectations  about treatment can all influence how much  pain they experience. In one study, children who reported believing they  had no control over pain actually experienced more intense pain than those who believed they  had some control. Features of the environment matter too: In one experiment, volunteers with a cold rod placed on  the back of their hand reported feeling more pain when they were  shown a red light than a blue one, even though the rod was the same  temperature each time. Finally, social factors like the  availability of family support can affect perception of pain. All of this means that a multi pronged  approach to pain treatment that includes pain specialists, physical  therapists, clinical psychologists, nurses and other healthcare professionals  is often most effective.We’re only beginning to uncover the  mechanisms behind the experience of pain, but there are some promising  areas of research. Until recently, we thought the glial cells surrounding  neurons were just support structures, but now we know they have a huge role  in influencing nociception. Studies have shown that disabling certain  brain circuits in the amygdala can eliminate pain in rats. And genetic testing in people with  rare disorders that prevent them from feeling pain have pinpointed several other  possible targets for drugs and perhaps eventually gene therapy.