@summary
a classroom erupts into a war of words as students grapple with a seemingly simple prompt: what is the opposite of a gun? this animation is part of the ted-ed series, "there's a poem for that," which features animated interpretations of poems both old and new that give language to some of life's biggest feelings. [a ted-ed production, a film by anna samo + lisa labracio, poem by brendan constantine, poem performed by brendan constantine, sound design by weston fonger, animation & design by anna samo + lisa labracio, animation produced by gerta xhelo].
@article
"The Opposites Game" For Patricia Maisch This day my students and  I play the Opposites Game with a line from Emily Dickinson.  My life had stood a loaded gun, it goes and  I write it on the board, pausing so they can call  out the antonyms – My Your Life Death Had stood ? Will sit A Many Loaded Empty Gun ? Gun. For a moment, very much  like the one between lightning and its sound,  the children just stare at me, and then it comes, a flurry,  a hail storm of answers – Flower, says one. No, Book, says another.  That's stupid, cries a third, the opposite of a  gun is a pillow. Or maybe a hug, but not a book,  no way is it a book. With this, the others gather their thoughts and suddenly it’s a shouting match.  No one can agree, for every student there’s a final answer.  It's a song, a prayer, I mean a promise,  like a wedding ring, and later a baby. Or what’s that  person who delivers babies? A midwife? Yes, a midwife.  No, that’s wrong. You're so wrong you’ll never be right again.  It's a whisper, a star, it's saying I love you into your  hand and then touching someone's ear. Are you crazy?  Are you the president of Stupid land? You should be,  When's the election? It’s a teddy bear, a sword,  a perfect, perfect peach. Go back to the first one,  it's a flower, a white rose. When the bell rings, I reach  for an eraser but a girl snatches it from my hand.  Nothing's decided, she says, We’re not done here.  I leave all the answers on the board. The next day  some of them have stopped talking to each other,  they’ve taken sides. There's a Flower club.  And a Kitten club. And two boys calling themselves The Snowballs.  The rest have stuck with the original game,  which was to try to write something like poetry. It's a diamond, it's a dance, the opposite of a gun is  a museum in France. It's the moon, it's a mirror, it's the sound of a bell and the hearer. The arguing starts again,  more shouting, and finally a new club. For the first time  I dare to push them. Maybe all of you are right, I say. Well, maybe. Maybe it's everything  we said. Maybe it’s everything we didn't say. It's words  and the spaces for words. They're looking at each other now.  It's everything in this room and outside this room and down  the street and in the sky. It's everyone on campus and at the mall,  and all the people waiting at the hospital. And at the post office. And, yeah, it's a flower, too. All the flowers.  The whole garden. The opposite of a gun is  wherever you point it. Don’t write that on the board,  they say. Just say poem. Your death will sit through  many empty poems.