@summary
in the 4th century bce, a young diogenes of sinope was found to be counterfeiting coins. he was stripped of his citizenship, his money, all his possessions and sent into exile. he decided he would live self-sufficiently, close to nature, without materialism, vanity, or conformity and only then could he be truly free. william d. desmond details how diogenes gave rise to the philosophy of cynicism. [directed by avi ofer, narrated by addison anderson, music by stephen larosa].
@article
In the 4th century BCE, a banker’s son threw the city of Sinope  into scandal by counterfeiting coins.When the dust finally settled,  the young man, Diogenes of Sinope, had been stripped of his citizenship,  his money, and all his possessions.At least, that’s how the story goes. While many of the details  of Diogenes’ life are shadowy, the philosophical ideas  born out of his disgrace survive today.In exile, Diogenes decided  that by rejecting the opinions of others and societal measures of success,  he could be truly free. He would live self sufficiently,  close to nature, without materialism, vanity, or conformity. In practice, this meant he spent years  wandering around Greek cities with nothing but a cloak, staff,  and knapsack— outdoors year round, forgoing technology,  baths, and cooked food.He didn’t go about this new existence  quietly, but is said to have teased passers by  and mocked the powerful, eating, urinating  and even masturbating in public. The citizens called him a kyôn—  a barking dog. Though meant as an insult, dogs were actually a good symbol  for his philosophy— they’re happy creatures, free from abstractions  like wealth or reputation.Diogenes and his growing number  of followers became known as “dog philosophers,”  or kynikoi, a designation  that eventually became the word “Cynic.” These early Cynics were a carefree bunch, drawn to the freedom  of a wandering lifestyle. As Diogenes’ reputation grew,  others tried to challenge his commitment. Alexander the Great  offered him anything he desired. But instead of asking for material goods, Diogenes only asked Alexander  to get out of his sunshine.After Diogenes’ death, adherents to his philosophy  continued to call themselves Cynics for about 900 years, until 500 CE. Some Greek philosophers, like the Stoics, thought everyone  should follow Diogenes’ example. They also attempted to tone down  his philosophy to be more acceptable  to conventional society— which, of course, was fundamentally at odds  with his approach.Others viewed the Cynics less charitably. In the Roman province of Syria  in the 2nd century CE, the satirist Lucian described the Cynics  of his own time as unprincipled, materialistic, self promoting hypocrites, who only preached  what Diogenes had once actually practiced. Reading Lucian’s texts centuries later, Renaissance and Reformation writers  called their rivals cynics as an insult— meaning people who criticized others  without having anything worthwhile to say.This usage eventually laid the groundwork  for the modern meaning of the word “cynic:" a person who thinks everyone else  is acting out of pure self interest, even if they claim a higher motive.Still, the philosophy of cynicism  had admirers, especially among those  who wished to question the state of society. The 18th century French philosopher  Jean Jacques Rousseau was called the “new Diogenes” when he argued  that the arts, sciences, and technology, corrupt people.In 1882, Friedrich Nietzsche  reimagined a story in which Diogenes  went into the Athenian marketplace with a lantern, searching in vain  for a single honest person. In Nietszche’s version, a so called madman rushes into a town square to proclaim that “God is dead.” This was Nietzsche’s way  of calling for a “revaluation of values,” and rejecting  the dominant Christian and Platonic idea of universal, spiritual insights  beyond the physical world. Nietzsche admired Diogenes  for sticking stubbornly to the here and now.More recently, the hippies of the 1960s  have been compared with Diogenes as counter cultural rebels.Diogenes’ ideas  have been adopted and reimagined  over and over again. The original cynics  might not have approved of these fresh takes: they believed  that their values of rejecting custom and living closely with nature  were the only true values. Whether or not you agree with that,  or with any of the later incarnations, all have one thing in common:  they questioned the status quo. And that’s an example  we can still follow: not to blindly follow  conventional or majority views, but to think hard  about what is truly valuable.