@summary
this is episode 2 of our animated series "think like a coder." this 10-episode narrative follows a girl, ethic, and her robot companion, hedge, as they attempt to save the world. the two embark on a quest to collect three artifacts and must solve their way through a series of programming puzzles. [directed by kozmonot animation studio, narrated by addison anderson].
@article
After breaking Ethic out of prison, Hedge flies them both towards  a frontier settlement in the shadow of the Bradbarrier,  the great wall that encircles the nation.All the settlers there will soon gather  for the monthly feeding. The people of the wall spend their days  gathering up works of art and literature, from all across the land. On feeding day, the furnace bots arrive,  ravenous. If they eat, the lights stay on,  and the food gets delivered. If they starve, the people do too.Hedge’s fuel supply runs out just as he  and Ethic reach the outskirts of town, and they come in for a crash landing. Luckily, everyone is too busy preparing  for the feeding to notice.Today’s feeding is where Ethic  can find the leader of an underground resistance movement. This person knows the location of the  first of three powerful artifacts. The problem is, Hedge and  Ethic don’t know the resistance leader’s name  or appearance. But Hedge has gathered the  following information:The leader has green eyes. If the leader has red hair, their name has at least one consecutive double letter. If the leader wear glasses,  their name has exactly 2 vowels. Otherwise, their name has  exactly 3 vowels. There is exactly one person for whom  these are all true.As a fugitive, Ethic can’t sneak into the crowd without  drawing attention to herself. But she can give instructions to Hedge. And one tool she has is what  programmers call a conditional. That’s a statement of the form  “If A, then B.” Flowcharts are great illustrations  of how those work. This conditional translates to:  if A is true, carry out instruction B. There are also conditionals that account  for different possibilities. This says, “If A is true, perform  instruction B. Otherwise, carry out instruction C.”So what instructions does she give Hedge  so he can find the resistance leader?Pause now to figure it out for yourself.With a problem like this,  it can help to simplify first. What if Hedge just has to examine  this one person? What information does he need  to collect about her?He might ask, “Does she have green eyes?” What other questions should Hedge  ask to find the resistance leader, and how can he track those answers?Pause now to figure it out for yourself.It may seem intuitive how you’d approach  this problem as a human. But Hedge isn’t a human, and so the challenge comes from needing  to give him systematic instructions that will work in any scenario.Hedge needs to examine the settlers,  one at a time, until he discovers the right person. In other words, like with the  lock on the prison cell, this is a loop that repeats the  same instructions. Only this time the loop will involve  a series of questions in the form of conditionals, and will end as soon as Hedge  finds his target.But first, you’ll want to organize  your information. Each person has a set of characteristics:  Eye color, hair color, glasses, and name.Does this person have green eyes? If so, mark a check next to “eye color."  If not, mark an X there.If they have red hair, does their  name contain a double letter? If so, mark a check next to “hair color.” If they don’t have a double letter,  mark an X next to “hair color.” Anyone with red hair and no double  letter can’t be the resistance leader. But notice that if they have blue hair, Hedge will skip this question and  go on to the next one.For the last question, we can say, “If they wear glasses, does their name  have exactly 2 vowels? If they don’t have glasses, does their  name have exactly 3 vowels?” There will be people in the crowd with  glasses and 1 vowel, or no glasses and 2 vowels. But they’re not who we’re looking for,  so they’ll get X’s.The resistance leader must be someone  with either check marks or blanks next to every question. Blanks are ok, because if someone  has blue hair, the rule about red hair doesn’t  apply to them.You could have Hedge ask every question  about every person, and then choose the person with  only checks and blanks. But there’s a way to save yourself lots  of time: as soon as Hedge marks an X, have him move on to the next person. You don’t need to know the answer  to every question; just one X means they’re not the target  of your search.Hedge buzzes through the crowd, and within minutes finds Adila,  the resistance leader, and brings her back to Ethic.Adila agrees to help them steal the first  artifact— the node of power— but under one condition: that Ethic and Hedge jump start  the revolution by reprogramming the furnace bots  that terrorize the town. And right on cue, the robots descend.