@summary
nearly 28,000 species of orchid grow all around the world, bearing every imaginable color, shape and pattern. there's a cunning purpose behind these elaborate displays: many orchids trick insects into pollinating, sometimes even into having sex with them. how do they deploy these deceptive tactics? anne gaskett dives into the surprisingly complex ways orchids attract insects. [directed by mette ilene holmriis, narrated by bethany cutmore-scott, music by jarrett farkas]. 
@article
The world’s largest orchid  grows several meters tall. The tiniest is practically invisible. Some bloom high up in trees, while others live underground. All in, there are around 28,000 species  of orchid on earth – about as many as all the bird,  mammal and reptile species combined. They grow all over the world, bearing every imaginable colour, shape,  and pattern. And there’s a cunning purpose  behind these elaborate displays: many orchids trick insects, sometimes even into having sex with them.Like other flowers, most orchids need to attract insects to gather their pollen and  carry it between plants. But unlike most flowers, which attract a range of pollinators  with sweet nectar, these masters of deception  deploy other tactics– like pretending to be an insect’s mate, letting off alluring scents, and mimicking the appearance  of other species.One of their most intriguing methods  is sexual deception. Through a combination of sexy shapes  and pheromones, orchids convince insects  to mate with them. Take the bee orchid, whose petals look almost exactly like  the velvety body of a bee. This disguise is so convincing  that male bees land on the orchid and try to have sex with it, picking up pollen as they go. Other orchids have evolved contrasting  colours and ultraviolet spots– invisible to humans but  irresistible to insects. Still others have tactile ‘love handles’ that ensure insects are positioned  precisely for pollination. When a male wasp lands on the hammer orchid, for example, his enthusiastic mating motion  flips a hinge in the flower, forcing his body into the pollen. At the next flower he visits, that same hinge pushes his pollen covered  body onto the stigma, fertilizing it. Some orchids make such convincing mates that insects even ejaculate on them, wasting valuable sperm.But the most vital component of  sexual deception is scent: orchids mimic the precise scent  of a single insect species. This is possible because many insects  and flowers produce simple organic compounds  called hydrocarbons, which form a layer that protects  their bodies from drying out. The precise blend of compounds  in this layer is species specific. Its scent can double as a way for insects  to attract potential mates, known as a sex pheromone. Over the course of many  thousands of years, random compound combinations  have given some orchid species precisely the same signature scent  as particular insect species. This matching scent allows them to  attract male pollinators who fall over and over again for the flowers masquerading as females of their own species.Sexual deception isn’t the only trick  orchids have up their sleeves. Their oldest scam is mimicking the shapes  and colours of other nectar producing flowers— but without the sweet nectar. Some orchids also masquerade as places  where insects lay their eggs. One species not only has the colour and  appearance of rotting meat; it emits a scent of decay as well– drawing in flies who deposit  their eggs on the flower and unwittingly pollinate the plant. Other orchids look and smell just like the fungi on which certain insects lay their eggs.Where do all these bizarre adaptations  come from? Random genetic mutations in orchids  may result in a trait– like a scent or a shape– that, by chance, matches the needs  of a single insect species. The huge diversity within the insect  world also increases the likelihood that an orchid will find  a unique audience. Able to make more seeds and offspring with the help of its dedicated pollinators, the orchid successfully reproduces  in isolation, and becomes a new species. But because of their dependence on  sometimes just one pollinator species, orchids are also vulnerable, and many quickly go extinct.Over time, though, more orchid species have formed  than died out, and orchids are some of the most diverse  flowering plants. They have such exuberant and otherworldly  shapes that they occasionally deceive  human senses, too: In their petals we see what appear  to be tiny, dancing people, monkey’s faces, spiders, and even birds in flight.