@summary
most of the forest lives in the shadow of the giants that make up the highest canopy. these are the oldest trees, with hundreds of children and grandchildren. they check in with their neighbors, share food, supplies and wisdom gained over their lives, all while rooted in place. how do they do this? camille defrenne and suzanne simard explore the vast root system and intricate communication of trees. [directed by avi ofer, narrated by bethany cutmore-scott, music by workplaywork and cem misirlioglu].
@article
Most of the forest lives in the  shadow of the giants that make up the highest canopy. These are the oldest trees, with hundreds of children and  thousands of grandchildren. They check in with their neighbors,  sharing food, supplies, and wisdom gained over their long lives.They do all this rooted in place, unable  to speak, reach out, or move around. The secret to their success lies  under the forest floor, where vast root systems support the  towering trunks above. Partnering with these roots are symbiotic  fungi called mycorrhizae.These fungi have countless branching,  thread like hyphae that together make up the mycelium. The mycelium spreads across a much larger  area than the tree root system and connect the roots of different  trees together. These connections form  mycorrhizal networks. Through mycorrhizal networks, fungi can pass resources and signaling  molecules between trees.We know the oldest trees have the  largest mycorrhizal networks with the most connections to other trees, but these connections are incredibly  complicated to trace. That’s because there are about a hundred  species of mycorrhizal fungi– and an individual tree might be colonized  by dozens of different fungal organisms, each of which connects to a  unique set of other trees, which in turn each have their own unique  set of fungal associations. To get a sense of how substances flow  through this network, let’s zoom in on sugars, as they travel from a mature tree to a  neighboring seedling.Sugar’s journey starts high above  the ground, in the leaves of the tallest trees  above the canopy. The leaves use the ample sunlight up there to create sugars through photosynthesis. This essential fuel then travels  through the tree to the base of the trunk in the thick sap.From there, sugar flows down to the roots. Mycorrhizal fungi encounter the  tips of the roots and either surround or penetrate  the outer root cells, depending on the type of fungi. Fungi cannot produce sugars, though they  need them for fuel just like trees do. They can, however, collect nutrients from the soil much  more efficiently than tree roots— and pass these nutrients into  the tree roots. In general, substances flow from where they are more  abundant to where they are less abundant, or from source to sink. That means that the sugars flow from the  tree roots into the fungal hyphae. Once the sugars enter the fungus, they travel along the hyphae through  pores between cells or through special hollow  transporter hyphae. The fungus absorbs some of the sugars, but some travels on and enters  the roots of a neighboring tree, a seedling that grows in the shade and  has less opportunity to photosynthesize sugars.But why does fungus transport resources  from tree to tree? This is one of the mysteries of the  mycorrhizal networks. It makes sense for fungus to exchange soil nutrients and sugar with a tree— both parties benefit. The fungus likely benefits in less obvious ways from being part of a network between trees, but the exact ways  aren’t totally clear. Maybe the fungus benefits from  having connections with as many different trees as possible, and maximizes its connections by shuttling molecules between trees. Or maybe plants reduce their  contributions to fungi if the fungi don’t facilitate exchanges  between trees.Whatever the reasons, these fungi pass an incredible amount  of information between trees. Through the mycorrhizae, trees can tell  when nutrients or signaling molecules are coming from a member of their  own species or not. They can even tell when information is  coming from a close relative like a sibling or parent. Trees can also share information  about events like drought or insect attacks through their  fungal networks, causing their neighbors to increase  production of protective enzymes in anticipation of threats.The forest’s health relies on these  intricate communications and exchanges. With everything so deeply interconnected, what impacts one species is bound  to impact others.