@summary
in the african grasslands, a gazelle suffering from tuberculosis takes its last breath. the animal's corpse threatens to infect the water, but for the vulture, this isn't a problem: it's a feast. with a stomach of steel that can digest diseased meat and waste, vultures are essential to removing dangerous pathogens from ecosystems. kenny coogan explores the importance of the desert's cleanup crew. [directed by katarina jukić, narrated by addison anderson].
@article
In the grasslands of Mauritania, a gazelle suffering from tuberculosis  takes its last breath. Collapsing near a small pool, the animal’s corpse  threatens to infect the water. But for the desert’s cleanup crew,  this body isn’t a problem: it’s a feast.Weighing up to 10 kilograms and possessing a wingspan  of nearly 3 meters, the lappet faced vulture  is the undisputed king of the carcass. This bird’s powerful beak and strong neck easily tear through tough hide  and muscle tissue, opening entry points  for weaker vultures to dig in.This colossal competition is too dangerous for the tiny Egyptian vulture. With a wingspan of only 180 centimeters, this vulture migrated to Africa  from his family nest in Portugal, using thermal updrafts to stay aloft  for hours at a time. But upon arrival, he finds himself near  the bottom of the pecking order. Fortunately, what he lacks in size,  he makes up for in intelligence. A short distance away,  he spots an unguarded ostrich nest, full of immense, but impenetrable eggs. Using a large rock, he smashes one open for a well earned meal— though he’ll circle back to the gazelle  once the larger birds are gone.High above the commotion  are Ruppell’s Griffon vultures. Soaring at an altitude  of over 11,000 meters, these birds fly higher  than any other animal. At this height, they can’t see  individual carcasses. But the sight of their fellow vultures  guides them to the feeding. Their featherless heads help them regulate the sudden rise in temperature  as they descend— and keep them clean  as they tear into the decaying gazelle.The carcass is stripped clean in hours, well before the rotting meat  infects the water supply. And the tuberculosis doesn’t  stand a chance at infecting the vultures. These birds have evolved the lowest  gastric pH in the animal kingdom, allowing them to digest diseased  carrion and waste without becoming sick. In fact, species like  the mountain dwelling bearded vulture have stomachs so acidic, they can digest most bones  in just 24 hours. This adaptation helps smaller vultures  supplement their diet with dung, while larger vultures can consume  diseased meat up to 3 days old. Their acidic stomachs protect them  from living animals too: their rancid vomit  scares off most predators.These stomachs of steel are essential  to removing pathogens like cholera, anthrax, and rabies  from the African ecosystem. But while vultures can easily digest  natural waste, man made chemicals are another story. Diclofenac, a common veterinary drug  used to treat cattle in India, is fatal to vultures. And because local religious beliefs  prohibit eating beef, scavengers often consume cattle carcasses. Since the 1990s, the drug, along with threats from electricity pylons and habitat loss, has contributed to a 95% decline  in the region’s vulture population. In nearby Africa,  poachers intentionally poison carcasses to prevent the birds’ presence from  alerting authorities to their location. One poisoned carcass can kill  over 500 vultures.Today, more than 50% of all vulture  species are endangered. In regions where vultures  have gone extinct, corpses take three times longer to decay. These carcasses contaminate  drinking water, while feral dogs and rats carry  the diseases into human communities. The Asian and African Vulture Crisis  has led to an epidemic of rabies in India, where infections kill roughly  20,000 people each year.Fortunately, some communities have already realized how important vultures are. Conservationists have successfully banned drugs like Diclofenac, while other researchers are working  to repopulate vulture communities through breeding programs. Some regions have even opened  vulture restaurants where farmers safely dispose  of drug free livestock. With help, vultures will be able  to continue their role conserving the health of our planet— transforming death and decay into life.