@summary
as of 2018, there are around 2.5 billion smartphone users in the world. if we broke open all the newest phones and split them into their component parts, that would produce around 85,000 kg of gold, 875,000 of silver, and 40,000,000 of copper. how did this precious cache get into our phones--and can we reclaim it? kim preshoff investigates the sustainability of phone production. [ted-ed animation by compote collective]. 
@article
As of 2018, there are around  2.5 billion smartphone users in the world. If we broke open all their newest phones, which are just a fraction  of the total that’ve been built, and split them into their component parts, that would produce  around 85,000 kilograms of gold, 875,000 of silver, and 40 million kilograms of copper. How did this precious cache  get into our phones, and can we reclaim it?Gold, silver, and copper  are actually just a few of the 70 or so chemical elements  that make up the average smartphone. These can be divided  into different groups, two of the most critical  being rare earth elements and precious metals.Rare earths are a selection of 17 elements that are actually common in Earth’s crust and are found in many areas across  the world in low concentrations. These elements have a huge range of magnetic, phosphorescent, and conductive properties that make them crucial  to modern technologies. In fact, of the 17 types  of rare earth metals, phones and other electronics  may contain up to 16. In smartphones, these create the screen  and color display, aid conductivity, and produce the signature vibrations, amongst other things.And yet, crucial as they are, extracting these elements from the earth is linked to some disturbing  environmental impacts. Rare earth elements can often be found, but in many areas, it’s not economically feasible  to extract them due to low concentrations. Much of the time, extracting them requires  a method called open pit mining that exposes vast areas of land. This form of mining destroys  huge swaths of natural habitats, and causes air and water pollution, threatening the health  of nearby communities.Another group of ingredients  in smartphones comes with similar environmental risks: these are metals such as copper, silver, palladium, aluminum, platinum, tungsten, tin, lead, and gold. We also mine magnesium, lithium, silica, and potassium to make phones, and all of it is associated  with vast habitat destruction, as well as air and water pollution. Mining comes with  worrying social problems, too, like large scale human  and animal displacement to make way for industrial operations, and frequently,  poor working conditions for laborers.Lastly, phone production  also requires petroleum, one of the main drivers of climate change. That entwines our smartphones inextricably with this growing planetary conundrum.And, what’s more, the ingredients we mine  to make our phones aren’t infinite. One day, they’ll simply run out, and we haven’t yet discovered effective  replacements for some. Despite this, the number of smartphones  is on a steady increase; by 2019 it’s predicted that  there’ll be close to 3 billion in use.This means that reclaiming the bounty  within our phones is swiftly becoming a necessity. So, if you have an old phone, you might want to consider your options  before throwing it away. To minimize waste, you could donate it  to a charity for reuse, take it to an e waste recycling facility, or look for a company  that refurbishes old models.However, even recycling companies  need our scrutiny. Just as the production of smartphones comes with social  and environmental problems, dismantling them does too. E waste is sometimes intentionally  exported to countries where labor is cheap  but working conditions are poor. Vast workforces,  often made up of women and children, may be underpaid, lack the training  to safely disassemble phones, and be exposed to elements  like lead and mercury, which can permanently damage  their nervous systems. Phone waste can also end up  in huge dump sites, leaching toxic chemicals  into the soil and water, mirroring the problems of the mines  where the elements originated.A phone is much more than it appears  to be on the surface. It’s an assemblage of elements from multiple countries, linked to impacts  that are unfolding on a global scale. So, until someone invents  a completely sustainable smartphone, we’ll need to come to terms with how this technology affects widespread places and people.