@summary
there are many different approaches to modern yoga— though most forms have three core elements: physical postures, breathing exercises, and spiritual contemplation.this blend of physical and mental exercise is widely believed to have a unique set of health advantages. but is yoga actually beneficial to your health? krishna sudhir examines how this ancient tradition impacts the body and mind. [directed by zsuzsanna kreif, narrated by addison anderson, music by cem misirlioglu / workplaywork].
@article
At some point between  the 1st and 5th century CE, the Hindu sage Patañjali began to codify the ancient, meditative traditions practiced throughout India. He recorded techniques nearly as old  as Indian civilization itself in 196 manuals called the Yoga Sutras. These texts defined yoga as the ‘yoking’  or restraining of the mind from focusing on external objects in efforts to reach a state  of pure consciousness. Over time, yoga came to incorporate physical elements from gymnastics and wrestling. Today, there are a multitude of approaches to modern yoga— though most still maintain the three core elements of Patañjali’s practice: physical postures, breathing exercises,  and spiritual contemplation.This blend of physical  and mental exercise is widely believed to have a unique set  of health advantages. Such as improving strength and flexibility, boosting heart and lung function,  and enhancing psychological well being. But what have contemporary studies shown regarding the benefits of this ancient tradition?Despite attempts by many researchers, it's tough to make specific claims  about yoga's advantages. Its unique combination of activities  makes it difficult to determine which component is producing  a specific health benefit. Additionally, yoga studies are often  made up of small sample sizes that lack diversity, and the heavy reliance on self reporting makes results subjective. However, there are some health benefits that have more robust scientific  support than others.Let’s start with flexibility and strength. Twisting your body  into yoga’s physical postures stretches multiple muscle groups. In the short term, stretching can change the water content of these muscles, ligaments, and tendons  to make them more elastic. Over time, regular stretching  stimulates stem cells which then differentiate  into new muscle tissue and other cells that generate  elastic collagen. Frequent stretching also reduces  the body’s natural reflex to constrict muscles, improving your pain tolerance  for feats of flexibility.Researchers haven’t found  that any one form of yoga improves flexibility more than another, so the impact of specific  postures is unclear. But like other low impact exercises, yoga reliably improves fitness  and flexibility in healthy populations.The practice has also been shown to be a potentially powerful therapeutic tool. In studies involving patients with  a variety of musculo skeletal disorders, yoga was more helpful at reducing pain  and improving mobility than other forms of low impact exercise. Adding yoga to an existing  exercise routine can improve strength and flexibility for hard to treat  conditions like chronic lower back pain, rheumatoid arthritis, and osteoporosis.Yoga’s mix of physical exercise  and regimented breathing has proven similarly therapeutic  for lung health. Lung diseases like chronic bronchitis,  emphysema, and asthma shrink the passageways that carry oxygen, while weakening the membrane  that brings oxygen into the blood. But breathing exercises  like those found in yoga relax the muscles constricting  those passageways and improve oxygen diffusion. Increasing the blood’s oxygen content is especially helpful for those with weak heart muscles who have difficulty pumping enough oxygen throughout the body. And for those with healthy hearts, this practice can lower blood pressure and reduce risk factors for cardiovascular disease.Yoga’s most widely celebrated benefit may be the most difficult to prove: its psychological effects. Despite the longstanding association  between yoga and psychological wellbeing, there’s little conclusive evidence  on how the practice affects mental health. One of the biggest claims is that yoga improves symptoms  of depression and anxiety disorders. Since diagnosis of these conditions varies widely as do their origin and severity, it’s difficult to quantify yoga’s impact. However, there is evidence to suggest that yoga can help reduce  the symptoms of stress, as well as meditation or relaxation.Research on the effects  of yoga is still evolving. In the future, we’ll need larger studies,  incorporating diverse participants, which can measure yoga’s impact on heart attacks, cancer rates, cognitive function and more. But for now, yoga can continue  its ancient tradition as a way to exercise, reflect, and relax.