@summary
the universe began in a big bang nearly fourteen billion years ago, and has been expanding ever since. but how does the universe expand and what is it expanding into? sajan saini explains the existing theories around the big bang and what, if anything, lies beyond our universe. [ted-ed animation by wooden plane productions]
@article
The universe began its  cosmic life in a big bang nearly fourteen billion years ago, and has been expanding  ever since. But what is it expanding into? That's a complicated question. Here's why: Einstein's equations of general relativity describe space and time as a kind of inter connected fabric for the universe. This means that what we know of as space and time exist only as part of the universe and not beyond it. Now, when everyday objects expand, they move out into more space. But if there is no such thing as space to expand into, what does expanding  even mean? In 1929 Edwin Hubble's  astronomy observations gave us a definitive answer. His survey of the night sky found all faraway galaxies recede, or move away, from the Earth. Moreover, the further the galaxy,  the faster it recedes. How can we interpret this? Consider a loaf of raisin bread rising in the oven. The batter rises by the same amount in between each and every raisin. If we think of raisins as a  stand in for galaxies, and batter as the space between them, we can imagine that the stretching or expansion of intergalactic space will make  the galaxies recede from each other, and for any galaxy, its faraway neighbors will recede a larger distance than the nearby ones in the same amount of time. Sure enough, the equations of general relativity predict a cosmic tug of war between gravity  and expansion. It's only in the dark void between galaxies where expansion wins out, and space stretches. So there's our answer. The universe is expanding  unto itself. That said, cosmologists are pushing  the limits of mathematical models to speculate on what, if anything, exists beyond our spacetime. These aren't wild guesses, but hypotheses that tackle kinks in the scientific theory of the Big Bang. The Big Bang predicts matter to be  distributed evenly across the universe, as a sparse gas —but then, how  did galaxies and stars come to be? The inflationary model  describes a brief era of incredibly rapid expansion that relates quantum fluctuations  in the energy of the early universe, to the formation of clumps of gas  that eventually led to galaxies. If we accept this paradigm, it may  also imply our universe represents one region in a greater cosmic reality  that undergoes endless, eternal inflation. We know nothing of this  speculative inflating reality, save for the mathematical prediction  that its endless expansion may be driven by an unstable  quantum energy state. In many local regions, however,  the energy may settle by random chance into a stable state, stopping  inflation and forming bubble universes. Each bubble universe —ours being one of them —would be described by its own  Big Bang and laws of physics. Our universe would be part  of a greater multiverse, in which the fantastic rate of eternal  inflation makes it impossible for us to encounter a neighbor universe. The Big Bang also predicts that in the early,  hot universe, our fundamental forces may unify into one super force. Mathematical string theories suggest  descriptions of this unification, in addition to a fundamental structure  for sub atomic quarks and electrons. In these proposed models, vibrating strings  are the building blocks of the universe. Competing models for strings have now  been consolidated into a unified description, and suggest these structures may interact  with massive, higher dimensional surfaces called branes. Our universe may be contained  within one such brane, floating in an unknown higher dimensional  place, playfully named “the bulk,” or hyperspace. Other branes—containing other types of  universes—may co exist in hyperspace, and neighboring branes may even share  certain fundamental forces like gravity. Both eternal inflation and branes  describe a multiverse, but while universes in eternal inflation are  isolated, brane universes could bump into each other. An echo of such a collision may appear  in the cosmic microwave background —a soup of radiation throughout our universe,  that’s a relic from an early Big Bang era. So far, though, we’ve found  no such cosmic echo. Some suspect these differing multiverse hypotheses  may eventually coalesce into a common description, or be replaced by something else. As it stands now, they’re speculative  explorations of mathematical models. While these models are inspired and  guided by many scientific experiments, there are very few objective experiments  to directly test them, yet. Until the next Edwin Hubble comes along, scientists will likely be left to argue about  the elegance of their competing models… and continue to dream about what,  if anything, lies beyond our universe.