@summary
at some point, most sexually active people will be infected with human papillomavirus, or hpv. there are over 100 types of hpv, and most of the time the body eliminates infections without symptoms— but some strains can pose serious health risks down the line. how can you protect yourself from hpv? emma bryce explains how the virus causes harm, who's at risk and how to minimize those risks. [directed by sharon colman, narrated by bethany cutmore-scott, music by miguel d'oliveira].
@article
At some point, most sexually active people will be  infected with human papillomavirus, or ‘HPV.’ There are over 100 types of HPV, and most of the time the body  eliminates infections without symptoms– but some strains can pose serious  health risks down the line.HPV causes contact infections, which means the virus stays in the cells near the point of infection rather than spreading throughout the whole body. Since HPV is often transmitted through  sexual activity, this usually means the cells of the  vagina, vulva, penis, anus, mouth and throat. We can test for HPV in cells from  these areas, but while testing for the virus  is scientifically possible, it isn’t common. The main reason is that, while there are treatments for the  adverse health effects caused by HPV, there’s no treatment for the virus itself. So testing for HPV would yield many,  many positives, and although most of them won’t  be cause for concern, there is still no treatment plan for  clearing the body of the virus.But there are other good ways to  protect yourself from HPV. We’re going to walk through how  HPV can cause harm, who’s at risk, and how to  minimize those risks.The body’s immune system is able to eradicate most strains of HPV before they cause any harm— and without people even knowing  they’ve been infected. Certain other strains– like HPV 6 and 11– cause abnormalities in the cells of the  infected tissue, which can develop into genital warts. While these are infectious  and require treatment, usually with topical creams, wart causing strains don’t create  longer term damage. But another 13 strains can cause DNA mutations that cause cells to divide at a much faster pace than normal, propelling the development of  cancerous growths. The cells of the cervix are  especially at risks. Two in particular– HPV 16 and 18– are responsible for the majority of  cases of cervical cancer, which is now the fourth most common type of cancer in women.It can take up to 20 years for cancer  symptoms to appear, but with regular screening, we can discover cellular abnormalities in the cervix before they develop into cancer. Women over 21 can undergo a regular  pap smear, where a sample of tissue is gently  scraped from the lining of the cervix to test for abnormal cells. A positive test doesn’t mean the person has cervical cancer, but rather that there are irregular  cells in the cervix that could develop into cancer in the future.Patients are then either monitored  with more frequent pap smears, or, for more severe irregularities, undergo a procedure called a colposcopy. This involves a doctor examining the  cervix through a microscope, and possibly taking a small biopsy of  tissue for closer examination. In some cases, the affected tissue  may be removed.HPV infections of the throat may lead to head and neck cancers, but for now there’s no equivalent of the  pap smear for the throat. Using condoms helps prevent  the spread of HPV during sex. And there are three safe, effective  vaccines that all target HPV 16 and 18. The vaccine comes in two or three doses  a few months apart, and it’s only beneficial if you  receive them all. Right now the vaccine is part of standard  care for girls aged 11 to 18 in many countries– though it’s increasingly becoming  available to boys as well. Adult women and men in countries including the United States and the United Kingdom can opt to receive the vaccine, and evidence suggests that vaccination of women and men could reduce the worldwide incidence of cervical cancer by almost 90%. Researchers are also  developing an injection for people who are already infected  with HPV 16 and 18, which would target the infected cells to stop them from developing  into cancerous ones. So while there’s still room for  improvement in screening, treatment, and access to each, condom use, vaccination,  and cervical screening can each reduce the harm caused by HPV.