@summary
consider the following scenario: a highly infectious, sometimes deadly respiratory virus infects humans for the first time. it spreads rapidly worldwide, and the who declares a pandemic. the death toll starts to rise and everyone is asking the same question: when will the pandemic end? alex rosenthal details the three main strategies governments can use to contain and end a pandemic. [directed by visorama, narrated by jack cutmore-scott, music by bamm bamm wolfgang].
@article
Consider this unfortunately  familiar scenario. Several months ago a highly infectious, sometimes deadly respiratory virus infected humans for the first time. It then proliferated faster  than public health measures could contain it. Now the World Health Organization (WHO) has declared a pandemic, meaning that it’s spreading worldwide. The death toll is starting to rise  and everyone is asking the same question: when will the pandemic end?The WHO will likely declare  the pandemic over once the infection is mostly contained and rates of transmission drop  significantly throughout the world.But exactly when that happens depends on what global governments choose to do next. They have three main options: Race through it, Delay and Vaccinate,  or Coordinate and Crush. One is widely considered best,  and it may not be the one you think.In the first, governments and communities  do nothing to halt the spread and instead allow people to be exposed  as quickly as possible. Without time to study the virus, doctors know little about  how to save their patients, and hospitals reach peak capacity  almost immediately. Somewhere in the range of millions  to hundreds of millions of people die, either from the virus  or the collapse of health care systems. Soon the majority of people  have been infected and either perished or survived by building up their immune responses. Around this point herd immunity kicks in, where the virus can no longer find new hosts. So the pandemic fizzles out  a short time after it began.But there’s another way to create  herd immunity without such a high cost of life. Let’s reset the clock to the moment  the WHO declared the pandemic. This time, governments and communities around the world slow the spread of the virus  to give research facilities time to produce a vaccine. They buy this crucial time through tactics that may include widespread testing to identify carriers, quarantining the infected  and people they’ve interacted with, and physical distancing.Even with these measures in place,  the virus slowly spreads, causing up to hundreds of thousands  of deaths. Some cities get the outbreak under control and go back to business as usual, only to have a resurgence and return to physical distancing  when a new case passes through. Within the next several years, one or possibly several vaccines become  widely, and hopefully freely, available thanks to a worldwide effort. Once 40 90% of the population  has received it— the precise amount varying  based on the virus— herd immunity kicks in,  and the pandemic fizzles out.Let’s rewind the clock one more time,  to consider the final strategy: Coordinate and Crush. The idea here is to simultaneously starve the virus, everywhere, through a combination of quarantine,  social distancing, and restricting travel. The critical factor  is to synchronize responses. In a typical pandemic,  when one country is peaking, another may be getting its first cases. Instead of every leader responding  to what’s happening in their jurisdiction, here everyone must treat the world  as the giant interconnected system it is. If coordinated properly, this could end  a pandemic in just a few months, with low loss of life. But unless the virus is completely  eradicated— which is highly unlikely— there will be risks of it escalating  to pandemic levels once again. And factors like animals carrying  and transmitting the virus might undermine  our best efforts altogether.So which strategy is best for this deadly, infectious respiratory virus? Racing through it is a quick fix,  but would be a global catastrophe, and may not work at all  if people can be reinfected. Crushing the virus through Coordination  alone is also enticing for its speed, but only reliable with true  and nearly impossible global cooperation. That’s why vaccination, assisted by  as much global coordination as possible, is generally considered to be the winner; it’s the slow, steady,  and proven option in the race. Even if the pandemic officially ends  before a vaccine is ready, the virus may reappear seasonally, so  vaccines will continue to protect people. And although it may take years to create, disruptions to most people’s lives  won’t necessarily last the full duration. Breakthroughs in treatment  and prevention of symptoms can make viruses much less dangerous, and therefore require less extreme  containment measures.Take heart: the pandemic will end. Its legacy will be long lasting, but not all bad; the breakthroughs, social services,  and systems we develop can be used to the betterment of everyone. And if we take inspiration  from the successes and lessons from the failures, we can keep the next potential  pandemic so contained that our children’s children  won’t even know its name.