@summary
4,300 years ago in ancient sumer, the most powerful person in the city of ur was banished to wander the vast desert. her name was enheduanna, and by the time of her exile, she had written forty-two hymns and three epic poems— and sumer hadn't heard the last of her. who was this woman, and why was she exiled? soraya field fiorio details the life of history's first author. [directed by laura white, narrated by christina greer, music by phil brookes].
@article
4,300 years ago  in ancient Sumer, the most powerful person in the city of Ur was banished to wander the vast desert.Her name was Enheduanna. She was the high priestess of the moon god and history’s first known author. By the time of her exile, she had written  42 hymns and three epic poems— and Sumer hadn’t heard the last of her.Enheduanna lived 1,700 years  before Sappho, 1,500 years before Homer, and about 500 years before  the biblical patriarch Abraham. She was born in Mesopotamia, the land  between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, and the birthplace of the first cities  and high cultures. Her father was King Sargon the Great,  history’s first empire builder, who conquered the independent city states  of Mesopotamia under a unified banner. Sargon was a northern Semite  who spoke Akkadian, and the older Sumerian cities in the south viewed him as a foreign invader. They frequently revolted to regain  their independence, fracturing his new dynasty.To bridge the gap between cultures, Sargon appointed his only daughter,  Enheduanna, as high priestess in the empire’s most important temple. Female royalty traditionally  served religious roles, and she was educated to read  and write in both Sumerian and Akkadian, and make mathematical calculations.The world's first writing started in Sumer as a system of accounting, allowing merchants to communicate  over long distances with traders abroad. Their pictogram system of record keeping  developed into a script about 300 years  before Enheduanna’s birth. This early writing style,  called cuneiform, was written with a reed stylus pressed  into soft clay to make wedge shaped marks. But until Enheduanna, this writing mostly took the form  of record keeping and transcription, rather than original works attributable  to individual writers.Enheduanna’s Ur was a city  of 34,000 people with narrow streets, multi storied brick homes, granaries,  and irrigation. As high priestess, Enheduanna  managed grain storage for the city, oversaw hundreds of temple workers,  interpreted sacred dreams, and presided over the monthly  new moon festival and rituals celebrating the equinoxes.Enheduanna set about unifying  the older Sumerian culture with the newer Akkadian civilization. To accomplish this,  she wrote 42 religious hymns that combined both mythologies. Each Mesopotamian city  was ruled by a patron deity, so her hymns were dedicated  to the ruling god of each major city. She praised the city’s temple,  glorified the god’s attributes, and explained the god’s relationship  to other deities within the pantheon. In her writing,  she humanized the once aloof gods— now they suffered, fought, loved,  and responded to human pleading.Enheduanna’s most valuable  literary contribution was the poetry she wrote to Inanna,  goddess of war and desire, the divinely chaotic energy  that gives spark to the universe. Inanna delighted in all forms  of sexual expression and was considered so powerful that  she transcended gender boundaries, as did her earthly attendants, who could  be prostitutes, eunuchs or cross dressers.Enheduanna placed Inanna at the top of  the pantheon as the most powerful deity. Her odes to Inanna mark the first time  an author writes using the pronoun “I,” and the first time writing is used  to explore deep, private emotions.After the death of Enheduanna’s father,  King Sargon, a general took advantage  of the power vacuum and staged a coup. As a powerful member of the ruling family, Enheduanna was a target, and the general exiled her from Ur. Her nephew,  the legendary Sumerian king Naram Sin, ultimately crushed the uprising  and restored his aunt as high priestess.In total, Enheduanna served  as high priestess for 40 years. After her death,  she became a minor deity, and her poetry was copied, studied,  and performed throughout the empire for over 500 years. Her poems influenced  the Hebrew Old Testament, the epics of Homer, and Christian hymns. Today, Enheduanna’s legacy still exists, on clay tablets that have  stood the test of time.