@summary
a new drug reduces the risk of heart attacks by 40%. shark attacks are up by a factor of two. drinking a liter of soda per day doubles your chance of developing cancer. these are all examples of a common way risk is presented in news articles, and can often be misleading. so how can we better evaluate risk? gerd gigerenzer explores the difference between relative and absolute risk. [directed by visorama, narrated by addison anderson].
@article
A new drug reduces  the risk of heart attacks by 40%. Shark attacks are up by a factor of two. Drinking a liter of soda per day  doubles your chance of developing cancer.These are all examples of relative risk, a common way risk  is presented in news articles. Risk evaluation is a complicated tangle  of statistical thinking and personal preference. One common stumbling block  is the difference between relative risks like these  and what are called absolute risks.Risk is the likelihood  that an event will occur. It can be expressed  as either a percentage— for example, that heart attacks  occur in 11% of men between the ages of 60 and 79— or as a rate— that one in two million  divers along Australia’s western coast will suffer a fatal shark bite each year. These numbers express  the absolute risk of heart attacks and shark attacks in these groups. Changes in risk can be expressed  in relative or absolute terms. For example, a review in 2009  found that mammography screenings reduced the number of breast cancer deaths from five women in one thousand to four. The absolute risk reduction  was about .1%. But the relative risk reduction  from 5 cases of cancer mortality to four is 20%. Based on reports of this higher number, people overestimated  the impact of screening.To see why the difference between  the two ways of expressing risk matters, let’s consider  the hypothetical example of a drug that reduces heart attack risk by 40%. Imagine that out of a group  of 1,000 people who didn’t take the new drug,  10 would have heart attacks. The absolute risk  is 10 out of 1,000, or 1%. If a similar group of 1,000 people  did take the drug, the number of heart attacks would be six. In other words, the drug could prevent  four out of ten heart attacks— a relative risk reduction of 40%. Meanwhile, the absolute risk  only dropped from 1% to 0.6%— but the 40% relative risk decrease  sounds a lot more significant.Surely preventing  even a handful of heart attacks, or any other negative outcome,  is worthwhile— isn’t it? Not necessarily. The problem is that choices  that reduce some risks can put you in the path of others. Suppose the heart attack drug caused  cancer in one half of 1% of patients. In our group of 1,000 people, four heart attacks  would be prevented by taking the drug, but there would be  five new cases of cancer. The relative reduction  in heart attack risk sounds substantial and the absolute risk of cancer  sounds small, but they work out  to about the same number of cases.In real life, everyone’s individual evaluation of risk  will vary depending on  their personal circumstances. If you know you have a family history  of heart disease you might be more strongly motivated  to take a medication that would lower your heart attack risk, even knowing it provided  only a small reduction in absolute risk. Sometimes, we have to decide between  exposing ourselves to risks that aren’t directly comparable. If, for example, the heart attack drug  carried a higher risk of a debilitating,  but not life threatening, side effect like migraines  rather than cancer, our evaluation of whether that risk  is worth taking might change. And sometimes there isn’t necessarily  a correct choice: some might say even a minuscule risk  of shark attack is worth avoiding, because all you’d miss out on  is an ocean swim, while others wouldn’t even consider  skipping a swim to avoid an objectively tiny risk  of shark attack. For all these reasons,  risk evaluation is tricky at baseline, and reporting on risk can be misleading, especially when it shares some numbers  in absolute terms and others in relative terms. Understanding how these measures work will help you cut through  some of the confusion and better evaluate risk.