@summary
set in a small town in india, "the god of small things" revolves around fraternal twins rahel and estha, who are separated for 23 years after the fateful hours in which their cousin drowns, their mother's affair is revealed, and her lover is murdered. the book is set at the point of the twins' reunion and confronts the social mores of india. laura wright dives into arundhati roy's masterful storytelling. [directed by martina meštrović, narrated by bethany cutmore-scott].
@article
“A few dozen hours can affect the  outcome of whole lifetimes/ And that when they do,  those few dozen hours, like the salvaged remains  of a burned clock… must be resurrected from the ruins  and examined.” This is the premise of Arundhati Roy’s  1997 novel "The God of Small Things." Set in a town in Kerala, India called  Ayemenem, the story revolves around fraternal  twins Rahel and Estha, who are separated for 23 years  after the fateful few dozen hours in which their cousin drowns, their  mother’s illicit affair is revealed, and her lover is murdered. While the book is set at the point of  Rahel and Estha’s reunion, the narrative takes place mostly in the past, reconstructing the details around the tragic events that  led to their separation.Roy’s rich language and masterful  storytelling earned her the prestigious Booker prize  for "The God of Small Things." In the novel, she interrogates the culture of her native India, including its social mores  and colonial history. One of her focuses is the caste system, a way of classifying people by hereditary  social class that is thousands of years old. By the mid 20th century, the original four castes associated  with specific occupations had been divided into  some 3000 sub castes. Though the caste system was  Constitutionally abolished in 1950, it continued to shape  social life in India, routinely marginalizing people  of lower castes.In the novel, Rahel and Estha have a  close relationship with Velutha, a worker in their family’s pickle factory and member of the so called  “untouchable” caste. When Velutha and the twins’ mother, Ammu, embark on an affair, they violate what Roy describes as the  “love laws” forbidding intimacy between  different castes. Roy warns that the tragic consequences  of their relationship “would lurk forever in ordinary things,”  like “coat hangers,” “the tar on roads,” and “the absence of words.”Roy’s writing makes constant use of these  ordinary things, bringing lush detail to even the most  tragic moments. The book opens at the funeral of the  twins’ half British cousin Sophie after her drowning. As the family mourns, lilies curl and  crisp in the hot church. A baby bat crawls up a funeral sari. Tears drip from a chin like  raindrops from a roof.The novel forays into the past to explore the characters’ struggles to operate in a world  where they don’t quite fit, alongside their nation’s  political turmoil. Ammu struggles not to lash out at her  beloved children when she feels particularly trapped in her parents’ small town home, where neighbors judge and shun her  for being divorced. Velutha, meanwhile, balances his affair with Ammu and friendship with the twins not only with his employment  to their family, but also with his membership to a  budding communist countermovement to Indira Ghandi’s “Green Revolution.”In the 1960s, the misleadingly named  “Green Revolution” introduced chemical fertilizers  and pesticides and the damming of rivers to India. While these policies produced high yield  crops that staved off famine, they also forced people from lower castes  off their land and caused widespread  environmental damage.When the twins return to Ayemenem  as adults, the consequences of the Green Revolution  are all around them. The river that was bursting with life  in their childhood greets them “with a ghastly skull’s smile, with holes where teeth had been, and a limp hand raised  from a hospital bed.”As Roy probes the depths of human  experience, she never loses sight of the way her  characters are shaped by the time and the place where they live. In the world of "The God of Small Things," “Various kinds of despair competed  for primacy… personal despair could never be  desperate enough... personal turmoil dropped by at the wayside shrine of the vast, violent, circling, driving, ridiculous, insane, unfeasible  public turmoil of a nation.”