@summary
the prisoner strapped under a descending pendulum blade. a raven who refuses to leave the narrator's chamber. a beating heart buried under the floorboards. poe's macabre and innovative stories of gothic horror have left a timeless mark on literature. but just what is it that makes edgar allan poe one of the greatest american authors? scott peeples investigates. [ted-ed animation by compote collective]. 
@article
A high forehead topped  by disheveled black hair, a sickly pallor, and a look of deep intelligence  and deeper exhaustion in his dark, sunken eyes. Edgar Allan Poe’s image  is not just instantly recognizable – it’s perfectly suited to his reputation. From the prisoner strapped  under a descending pendulum blade, to a raven who refuses  to leave the narrator’s chamber, Poe’s macabre and innovative stories  of gothic horror have left a timeless mark on literature.But just what is it that makes Edgar Allan Poe one of the greatest American authors? After all, horror was a popular genre of the period, with many practitioners. Yet Poe stood out thanks to his careful attention to form and style. As a literary critic, he identified two cardinal rules  for the short story form: it must be short enough  to read in one sitting, and every word  must contribute to its purpose. By mastering these rules, Poe commands the reader’s attention and rewards them with an intense  and singular experience – what Poe called the unity of effect.Though often frightening, this effect goes far beyond fear. Poe’s stories use violence and horror to explore the paradoxes and mysteries of love, grief, and guilt, while resisting simple interpretations  or clear moral messages. And while they often hint  at supernatural elements, the true darkness they explore is the human mind and its propensity for self destruction. In “The Tell Tale Heart,” a ghastly murder is juxtaposed with the killer’s  tender empathy towards the victim – a connection that soon  returns to haunt him. The title character of "Ligeia" returns from the dead through the corpse  of her husband’s second wife – or at least the opium addicted  narrator thinks she does. And when the protagonist  of “William Wilson” violently confronts a man  he believes has been following him, he might just be staring  at his own image in a mirror. Through his pioneering use  of unreliable narrators, Poe turns readers into active participants who must decide when a storyteller might be misinterpreting or even lying about the events  they’re relating.Although he’s best known  for his short horror stories, Poe was actually one of the most versatile and experimental writers  of the nineteenth century. He invented the detective story  as we know it, with “The Murders in the Rue Morgue,” followed by “The Mystery of Marie Roget” and “The Purloined Letter.” All three feature  the original armchair detective, C. Auguste Dupin, who uses his genius and unusual powers  of observation and deduction to solve crimes that baffle the police. Poe also wrote satires of social  and literary trends, and hoaxes that in some cases  anticipated science fiction. Those included an account of  a balloon voyage to the moon, and a report of a dying patient  put into a hypnotic trance so he could speak from the other side. Poe even wrote an adventure novel  about a voyage to the South Pole and a treatise on astrophysics, all while he worked as an editor, producing hundreds of pages  of book reviews and literary theory.An appreciation of Poe’s career  wouldn’t be complete without his poetry: haunting and hypnotic. His best known poems are songs of grief,  or in his words, “mournful and never ending remembrance.” “The Raven,” in which the speaker  projects his grief onto a bird who merely repeats a single sound, made Poe famous.But despite his literary success, Poe lived in poverty  throughout his career, and his personal life was often  as dark as his writing. He was haunted by the loss of his mother  and his wife, who both died of tuberculosis  at the age of 24. Poe struggled with alcoholism and frequently antagonized  other popular writers. Much of his fame came from posthumous – and very loose – adaptations of his work. And yet, if he could’ve known  how much pleasure and inspiration his writing would bring to generations of readers and writers alike, perhaps it may have brought  a smile to that famously brooding visage.