@summary
"who's there?" whispered in the dark, this question begins a tale of conspiracy, deception and moral ambiguity. and in a play where everyone has something to hide, its answer is far from simple. written by william shakespeare, "hamlet" depicts its titular character haunted by the past, but immobilized by the future. iseult gillespie digs into the humanity and tragedy of hamlet. [directed by lucy animation studio, narrated by jack cutmore-scott, music by stephen larosa].
@article
"Who’s there?" Whispered in the dark, this question begins a tale of conspiracy, deception and moral ambiguity. And in a play where everyone  has something to hide, its answer is far from simple.Written by William Shakespeare  between 1599 and 1601, "Hamlet" depicts its titular character  haunted by the past, but immobilized by the future. Mere months after the sudden  death of his father, Hamlet returns from school a stranger  to his own home, and deeply unsure of what might be lurking in the shadows. But his brooding takes a turn when he’s visited by a ghost that  bears his father’s face. The phantom claims to be the victim  of a “murder most foul,” and convinces Hamlet that his uncle  Claudius usurped the throne and stole queen Gertrude’s heart. The prince’s mourning turns to rage, and he begins to plots his revenge on the new king and  his court of conspirators.The play is an odd sort of tragedy, lacking either the abrupt brutality or  all consuming romance that characterize Shakespeare’s  other work in the genre. Instead it plumbs the depths of its  protagonist’s indecisiveness, and the tragic consequences thereof. The ghost’s revelation draws Hamlet into  multiple dilemmas– what should he do, who can he trust, and what role might he play  in the course of justice? These questions are complicated  by a tangled web of characters, forcing Hamlet to negotiate friends,  family, court counselors, and love interests– many of whom possess ulterior motives.The prince constantly delays and dithers  over how to relate to others, and how he should carry out revenge. This can make Hamlet more than a little  exasperating, but it also makes him one of the most  human characters Shakespeare ever created. Rather than rushing into things, Hamlet becomes consumed with the awful  machinations of thinking itself. And over the course of the play, his endless questions come to echo  throughout our own racing minds.To accomplish this, Shakespeare employs his most introspective language. From the usurping king’s blazing  contemplation of heaven and hell, to the prince’s own cackling meditation on mortality, Shakespeare uses melancholic monologues to breathtaking effect. This is perhaps best exemplified in  Hamlet’s most famous declaration of angst:"To be or not to be—that is the question: Whether ’tis nobler in the mind to suffer The slings and arrows  of outrageous fortune, Or to take arms against a sea of troubles And, by opposing, end them."This monologue personifies Hamlet’s  existential dilemma: being torn between thought and action, unable to choose between life and death. But his endless questioning raises  yet another anxiety: is Hamlet’s madness part of a performance to confuse his enemies, or are we watching a character  on the brink of insanity?These questions weigh heavily on Hamlet’s  interactions with every character. And since he spends much of the play  facing inward, he often fails to see the destruction  left in his wake. He’s particularly cruel to Ophelia, his doomed love interest who is brought to madness by the prince’s erratic behavior. Her fate is one example of how tragedy  could have been easily avoided, and shows the ripple effect of Hamlet’s toxic mind games.Similar warning signs of tragedy are  constantly overlooked throughout the play. Sometimes, these oversights occur because  of willful blindness– such as when Ophelia’s father dismisses  Hamlet’s alarming actions as mere lovesickness. At other points, tragedy stems  from deliberate duplicity– as when a case of mistaken identity  leads to yet more bloodshed. These moments leave us with the  uncomfortable knowledge that tragedy evolves from human error– even if our mistake is to  leave things undecided.For all these reasons, perhaps the one  thing we never doubt is Hamlet’s humanity. But we must constantly grapple with who  the “real” Hamlet might be. Is he a noble son avenging his father? Or a mad prince creating courtly chaos? Should he act or observe, doubt or trust? Who is he? Why is he here? And who’s out there–  waiting in the dark?