@summary
by the light of the moon, a group sneaks into the woods, where they take mind-altering substances, switch it up romantically and brush up against creatures from another dimension. "a midsummer night's dream" sees shakespeare play with the boundary between illusion and reality - and dramatize the possibility that life is but a dream. iseult gillespie shares what makes this play a timeless classic. [directed by wow-how studio, narrated by bethany cutmore-scott, music by stephen larosa]. 
@article
By the light of the moon, a group of youths sneak into the woods, where they take mind altering substances, switch it up romantically,  and brush up against creatures  from another dimension. "A Midsummer’s Night’s Dream" sees  Shakespeare get psychedelic – and the result is a treat in the  theatre and on the page.First performed in the 1590's, this play is one of Shakespeare’s  friskiest works, filled with trickery, madness and magic. Set over the course of one night, Midsummer progresses at a rollicking pace. The plot is structured around patterns of  collision and dissolution, where characters from different worlds  are thrown together and torn apart. Shakespeare uses these patterns to mock  the characters’ self obsession and question authority with a comic twist.The action is set in Ancient Greece, but like many of Shakespeare’s plays  it reflects his contemporary concerns. The magical setting of the woods at night disrupts the boundaries between  separate groups, with bizarre results. Here, the bard plays with the rigid class  system of his own time, taking three distinct groups and turning their society upside down in a world where no mortal is in control.The play opens with young Hermia raging at her father Egeus and  Theseus, the King of Athens, who have forbidden her to marry  her lover Lysander. Hermia has no interest in her father's  choice for her of Demetrius – but her best friend Helena  definitely does. Furious at their elders, Hermia and  Lysander elope under cover of darkness, with Demetrius in hot pursuit. This is further complicated  by Helena’s decision to follow them all into the woods, in the hope of winning Demetrius’ heart.At this point, the woods are  getting crowded, as the lovers are sharing the space  with a group of “rude mechanicals”— a troupe of workers drunkenly rehearsing  a play, led by the jovial Nick Bottom. Unbeknownst to them, the humans have  entered into the world of the fairies.Despite their magical splendor,  Oberon and Titania, the king and queen of the fairies,  have their own romantic problems. Furious at his inability to control  Titania, the jealous Oberon commands the trickster Puck to squeeze the juice of a magical flower over her eyes. When she wakes up, she’ll fall in love  with the first thing she sees. On his mission, Puck gleefully sprinkles the juice over the eyes of the napping Demetrius and Lysander, and transforms Bottom’s head into that of a donkey for good measure.As eyes flicker open, a night of chaos commences that includes broken hearts, mistaken identity, and transformations. Out of all the characters, Bottom probably fares the best – when the bewitched Titania  lays eyes on him, she calls on her fairies to lavish him  with wine and treasures and sweeps the transfigured donkeyman  off his feet: “pluck the wings from painted butterflies/ To fan the moonbeams  from his sleeping eyes. Nod to him, elves,  and do him courtesies.”While magic is the catalyst to the action, the play reflects the real drama  of the things we do for love – and the nonsensical behavior  of the people under its spell. The moon overlooks the action  “like a silver bow,” signifying erratic behavior,  the dark side of love, and the bewitching allure of a world  where the usual rules don’t apply.Although the characters eventually  come to their senses, "A Midsummer Night's Dream"  raises the question of how much agency we have  over our own daily lives. But it’s not the more realistically rendered lovers, rulers or workers who have the last word, but the impish Puck who queries whether we can ever truly trust what we see:If we shadows have offended, Think but this and all is mended: That you have but slumbered here While these visions did appear.And in so doing, he evokes the effect of entering into the  magical world of great theatre that plays with the boundary between  illusion and reality – and dramatizes the possibility  that life is but a dream.