@summary
india's big cities have some of the worst air quality in the world. how can we fix this public health crisis? in an actionable talk, social entrepreneur arunabha ghosh lays out a five-step plan to put india on the path to cleaner, safer air -- and shows how every citizen can play an active role in getting there.
@article
Shah Rukh Khan: Something goes wrong with the air that we take for granted. The ill effects are suffered by all, rich and poor, city people and village folks, those inland and those on the coast. Nobody is exempt. So how do we give our children the chance to grow up in a world where the air is clean? Our next speaker addresses this vital question. So join me in giving a wholehearted welcome to the public policy expert and author, the multifaceted Dr. Arunabha Ghosh.(Music)Arunabha Ghosh: Let me tell you a story from China. In 2014, China declared war on pollution. In November that year, there was an international summit there. Presidents and prime ministers from many countries arrived. So industries around Beijing were shut down, half the cars were taken off the road. That week, I took a photograph of the unusually blue sky in Beijing. A few days later, when the summit had ended, the factories were humming again, the sky had again turned light grey. So newspapers started urging the government to make the blue skies permanent. Then in early 2015, a private citizen produced a documentary on air pollution called "Under the Dome." Just within four days, it was viewed 300 million times, and millions more continued discussing it on social media. Eventually, the government acted, and by 2018, the bulk of the Chinese population had witnessed a decline in air pollution by 32 percent on average.When will we demand clean air in India?I have a six year old daughter. Every morning, when I drop her to the school bus stop, I have to remind her not to take off her mask. That's the kind of world we live in. One day she pointed me to an advertisement for a face wash, which claimed that the polluting particles lodged deeply in our skin could be miraculously washed off. But what of the particles lodged in our lungs? When it's difficult to make out the difference between the lung of a smoker and the lung of a nonsmoker, we have a real problem, because I can run an air purifier at home, but can I lock up my daughter at home?Air pollution is the great leveler. It affects us all, rich and poor, city dweller or village folk, those living inland or those living on the coast, and it's affecting our health, our economic growth, our quality of life. In 2017, more than 1.2 million deaths in India were attributable to air pollution. That's more than those deaths caused by HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria or diarrhea.At the Council on Energy, Environment and Water, my colleagues find that today, one in two Indians is breathing air that does not meet our air quality standards. And the economic impact of this public health crisis is more than 80 billion dollars every year. At CEEW, my colleagues find that 80 percent of Indians can breathe clean air if we adopted stringent pollution controls.So here is my vision for India. In 2027, when we are celebrating our 80th year of independence, can we ensure that, by then, 80 cities in India have reduced air pollution by 80 percent? Let's called this Mission 80 80 80, and this is possible, but the role of citizens is going to be critical. To combat air pollution, we have to create a democratic demand for clean air. We can make this happen.First, we have to educate ourselves. Low cost sensors give us real time information about the air quality, but we still need information about how to interpret it and how to act. So we need to target information to schools and children, to resident welfare associations, to the elderly, who are more at risk. You know, when the temperature outside is 30 degrees versus 40 degrees, we know how to dress, we know what to do, what not to do. We need, similarly, information on what precautions to take when the air quality outside is poor, very poor, severe or hazardous.Second, we need to become active monitors. Today, most Indian cities and much of rural India have no air quality monitoring at all. So we need to demand that air quality sensors are installed in every constituency. Today, in Parliament, who is going to stand up for us as the air quality warrior? When enforcement agencies land up at polluting sites or dust spewing construction sites, their whack a mole approach doesn't always work, because as soon as their attention turns somewhere else, the offenders go back to business as usual. We citizens have to become the fire alarms. We have to demand emergency call in numbers and specialized task forces that can respond in real time to pollution sites. So we need not just the authority but the enforcement strength to crack down.Third, we have to be prepared to pay a price, whether it's for cars using BS6 fuel or for more expensive electricity from cleaner power plants. Last year, just before Diwali, I took a surprise inspection of polluting industries in an unauthorized industrial area just outside of Delhi, and I found polluting firecrackers were being sold. The Supreme Court had mandated only green firecrackers could be sold, but those were nowhere to be found. But the polluting ones were available. Why? Because we were ready to buy. As citizens, we have to reduce the demand for these polluting products or be prepared to pay more for cleaner products.Fourth step: let's build some empathy for our fellow citizens. How much does it take to keep a night guard warm rather than force them to burn rubbish to stay warm in winter? Or, let's take farmers. You know, it's very easy to blame them for burning the stubble of the rice paddy crop every winter, which causes air pollution. It's much harder to understand that it's the combination of our agricultural policy and our groundwater crisis that often leaves the farmer with no option but to burn the stubble. So we need to draw in the urban poor laborer or the rural poor farmer into our collective call for clean air. Farmers come and tell us that they want to adopt sustainable agriculture, but they need some help.And fifth, we have to change our lifestyles. Yes, public transport is often not available, but the choice to buy a cleaner, less polluting private vehicle is ours. The choice to segregate and recycle household waste is ours. You know, in Surat after the 1994 plague, citizens there take pride in keeping their city one of the cleanest in the country. Down south in Mysore, public private partnerships and citizen led eco clubs are coming together to reduce, segregate and recycle waste in a manner that landfills can be eliminated altogether. Now I'm not saying that officials have no responsibility here, but it is our collective apathy that takes the pressure off of our parliamentarians, the bureaucrats or the enforcement agencies.Mission 80 80 80 will only begin when we demand it. We have to create a democratic demand for clean air, because citizens, you and me, can decide what kind of air we breathe.Thank you.(Applause)SRK: Thank you so much. Tell me something: India, our country, do we have any advantages? Have we become aware of it earlier because of all the inputs from people like you?AG: Our biggest strength: our people and our ability to make change without always necessarily relying only on the government. And that strength of civil society and civil demand for a civilized living condition is, I think, our biggest asset. Then, all of those and more will happen.(Applause)SRK: Thank you, Dr. Ghosh. Bless you for coming here. And it's very enlightening. Thank you very much, and all the best with 80 80 80.Dr. Ghosh, everyone. AG: Thank you.(Applause)