@summary
the midwife xoquauhtli has a difficult choice to make. she owes a debt to her patron teteoinnan, the female warrior goddess at the center of the aztec seasonal festival, who must be kept happy or she will bring bad luck. xoquauhtli should participate in the festival today, but one of her patients could go into labor any minute. kay read outlines a day in the life of an aztec midwife. [directed by aim creative studios, narrated by bethany cutmore-scott, music by andré aires].
@article
Lord Sun dawns on the day called 7 Monkey, his fingers slowly spreading a rosy sheen that mixes softly with smoke rising  from Tenochtitlan’s many hearth fires. The midwife, Xoquauhtli,  has a difficult choice to make.A momentous shift from rainy season  to dry season is underway. All summer, the gods have kept  the people fed with corn, but the fertile summer months  are disappearing. This day occurs during the festival  that marks the shift between the summer season, when the gods feed the people, and the winter season, when the people feed the gods in return.Xoquauhtli owes a debt  to her patron, Teteoinnan, the female warrior goddess  at the center of this festival. Teteoinnan wages war both  on women’s battlefields of birth and in men’s battles  with Tenochtilan’s enemies. She must be kept happy  or she will bring bad luck. The midwife should participate  in the festival today, but one of her patients could  go into labor any minute.Xoquauhtli decides to check  on her patient first. The expecting mother hasn’t  worked too hard, chewed gum, or lifted heavy things. Her family is taking good care of her. Surely Xoquauhtli can take a little time  to honor her goddess. She leaves her apprentice in charge  and heads to the center of the city. Along the way, she sees women sweeping the roads and hanging gourds in preparation for the festival.Finally, she reaches the Great Pyramid. On top are two temples: the north, where rituals honor  the rain god in the summer, and the south one is where rituals  honor the war god in the winter. On the equinox, the sun rises  between the two sides. The ceremony begins with a mock battle  between the midwives and the other physicians. Xoquauhtli’s team battles heartily,  throwing nochtles, marigolds, and balls made of reed and moss. They joke, call their rivals names,  and laugh. But then, a girl comes running  with a message for Xoquauhtli. Her patient is in labor!She hurries back to the house. All the old women  from the extended family have already gathered for the birth— their experience is very valuable  if anything goes wrong.She readies herself with a prayer praising her most important tools, her fingers. Then she doses the patient with cihuapatli to help expel the baby, massages her in the sweathouse,  and rubs her stomach with tobacco. Offering Teteoinnan a short prayer, she urges her patient  to act like a warrior. A strong baby girl slips  into her waiting hands and the old women shout triumphant cries.Xoquauhtli takes a few drops of water  from a jade bowl, breaths on them, and places them on the baby’s tiny tongue. She calls her a precious greenstone,  a little warrior, and tells her how the Lord and Lady  of the Ninth Sky breathed life into her, sending her  to this place of burden and torment. She then turns to the new mother,  praising her, telling her she acted like  an eagle warrior, a jaguar warrior.By the time they finish, it’s late,  and the flames of the fire have died down. Xoquauhtli piles the remaining hot coals  in the center of the hearth, stoking them to keep them going. She lays the baby in a woven basket,  head facing the warming fire. This will warm her tonalli,  an important “soul” center in the body central to health and well being.It’s almost midnight—  if Xoquauhtli hurries, she can get back to the temple  for the culmination of the festival. She makes her way to the city center,  where a priest carries a woman on his back to the top of the pyramid. To begin the new season and feed the gods, she will be beheaded, symbolizing how corn is cut in the fields. Afterward, she will be reborn  as Lady Teteoinnan, and preside over the induction  of new warriors.