@summary
there are nearly a million known insect species in the world, but most have one of just five common types of mouthparts. why is this information useful to scientists? anika hazra explains how the features of an insect's mouthparts can help identify which order it belongs to, while also providing clues about how it evolved and what it feeds on.
@article
A whip like straw. Powerful, crushing blades. A pointed, piercing tube. There are nearly a million  known insect species in the world, but most have one of just  five common types of mouthparts. And that’s extremely useful to scientists because when they encounter  an unfamiliar insect in the wild, they can learn a lot about it  just by examining how it eats.Scientific classification, or taxonomy, is used to organize all  living things into seven levels: kingdom, phylum, class, order, family, genus, and species. The features of an insect’s mouthparts can help identify which order it belongs to, while also providing clues about how  it evolved and what it feeds on.The chewing mouthpart is the most common. It’s also the most primitive— all other mouthparts are thought to have  started out looking like this one before evolving into something different. It features a pair  of jaws called mandibles with toothed inner edges that cut up  and crush solid foods, like leaves or other insects. You can find this mouthpart  on ants from the Hymenoptera order, grasshoppers and crickets  of the Orthoptera order, dragonflies of the Odonata order, and beetles of the Coleoptera order.The piercing sucking mouthpart consists of a long, tube like structure called a beak. This beak can pierce plant  or animal tissue to suck up liquids like sap or blood. It can also secrete saliva  with digestive enzymes that liquefy food for easier sucking. Insects in the Hemiptera order  have piercing sucking mouthparts and include bed bugs, cicadas, aphids, and leafhoppers.The siphoning mouthpart, a friendlier version  of the piercing and sucking beak, also consists of a long, tube like  structure called a proboscis that works like a straw  to suck up nectar from flowers. Insects of the Lepidoptera order— butterflies and moths— keep their proboscises rolled up tightly beneath their heads when they’re not feeding and unfurl them when  they come across some sweet nectar.With the sponging mouthpart, there’s yet another tube, this time ending in two spongy lobes that contain many finer  tubes called pseudotracheae. The pseudotracheae secrete  enzyme filled saliva and soak up fluids  and dissolved foods by capillary action. House flies, fruit flies, and the other non biting  members of the Diptera order are the only insects  that use this technique. But, there’s a catch. Biting flies within Diptera, like mosquitoes, horse flies, and deer flies, have a piercing sucking mouthpart  instead of the sponging mouthpart.And finally, the chewing lapping mouthpart is a combination of mandibles and a proboscis with a tongue like  structure at its tip for lapping up nectar. On this type of mouthpart, the mandibles themselves  are not actually used for eating. For bees and wasps, members of the Hymenoptera order, they serve instead as tools  for pollen collecting and wax molding.Of course, in nature, there are always  exceptions to the rules. The juvenile stages of some insects,  for example, have completely different kinds  of mouths than their adult versions, like caterpillars, which use chewing  mouthparts to devour leaves before metamorphosing into butterflies and moths with siphoning mouthparts.Still, mouthpart identification can,  for the most part, help scientists—and you —categorize insects. So why not break out a magnifying lens and learn a little more about who’s nibbling your vegetable garden, biting your arm, or just flying by your ear.