@summary
the night before the death race across the wastelands is set to begin, your uncle, the great inventor slate kanoli, got kidnapped by the ruthless no-side gang. the only way to get him back is to race his coil runner against the gang yourself. win and they'll give back your uncle. lose and you'll forfeit the coil runner and all his other creations. can you win the race? alex gendler shows how. [directed by artrake studio, narrated by addison anderson].
@article
The night before the Death Race  across the Wastelands is set to begin, your uncle,  the great inventor Slate Kanoli, got kidnapped  by the ruthless No Side gang. The only way to get him back  is to race his Coil Runner against the gang yourself. Win and they’ll give back your uncle. Lose and you’ll forfeit the Coil Runner  and all his other creations. As the grueling race gets underway, you find yourself falling further  and further behind. Your only chance is to take a shortcut  your uncle told you about–– the Flux Ravine gambit.Fortunately, the Coil Runner comes  equipped with emergency turbo thrusters. Unfortunately, your uncle  was a notorious tinkerer, and the system still had some kinks  to work out. Just minor things  like the ignition exploding, the reactor leaking,  or the oxygen levels depleting— any of which would end  your racing career immediately. Before his kidnapping, Uncle Slate determined  that each of these critical failures was the ultimate result  of a chain reaction originating in the thrusters. He was also certain that while one factor could trigger two different effects, and two factors could each independently lead to the same effect, no effect is caused by two factors  in conjunction. However, Uncle Slate  never got around to pinpointing which thruster was responsible  for which error. All you have  are the notes from his test runs:1. When thrusters B and C are on,  the Fuel gauge glows.2.When thrusters A, B, and D are on, the Fuel gauge glows  and the Helium tank rattles.3.When thrusters C, D, and E are on, the Fuel gauge glows  and the Gravitometer spins.4.When thrusters A, D, and E are on, the Gravitometer spins  and the Helium tank rattles.5.Shortly after the Helium tank rattles  and the Gravitometer spins, the Ignition explodes  and the Oxygen levels deplete.6.Shortly after the Fuel gauge glows  and the Gravitometer spins, the Reactor leaks.You need to use  as many thrusters as possible to give yourself the best chance  at clearing the gap, without triggering any of the three  catastrophic failures. Which thrusters should you activate?Answer in 3 Answer in 2 Answer in 1The most important thing  to remember here is that even if we know  that one thing causes another, the converse is not necessarily true. For example, this panic switch  shuts off the coil runner’s engine. But the engine being off  doesn’t necessarily mean the panic switch was engaged— the coil runner could be  out of fuel, or damaged— or turned off normally. We can, however,  conclude that if the engine is running, the panic switch hasn’t been engaged.With that in mind, one way we can start  is to work backwards from the three defects that could  knock you out of the race. So let’s look at Slate’s last two notes, since they give direct information  about those. The Gravitometer spins in both cases,  but the results are different. That means the spinning Gravitometer can’t be the cause  of any particular malfunction. If it were, the same thing would happen  each time. So we can conclude that a glowing  Fuel gauge makes the reactor leak, while a rattling Helium tank  makes the Ignition explode and depletes the Oxygen levels.Once we know which two errors  we need to avoid, we can make a table  and use the logic of cause and effect to see which thrusters trigger them. Since the Helium tank is fine  during the first test run when thrusters B and C are active, we can assume neither makes it rattle. And from the third run  we know that D and E don’t either. That leaves thruster A, which was indeed used  in the second and fourth test runs where the Helium tank rattled.Now what causes the glowing Fuel gauge? From the fourth test run we know  it can’t be thrusters A, D, or E. So is the culprit, B, C,  or each of them separately? The answer can be found  in the second and third test runs: the fuel tank glowed in both,  but B was activated in one, and C in the other. That means the B and C thrusters each  independently make the Fuel tank glow.It looks like the A, B, and C  thrusters are off limits. Fortunately, the other two  are just enough to clear the jump. You rocket into first place and the gang  begrudgingly hands over your uncle. He thanks you profusely,  and decides to celebrate your victory with a cup of tea  from his latest contraption...