@summary
dutch artist piet mondrian's abstract, rectangular paintings inspired mathematicians to create a two-fold challenge. can you solve the puzzle and get to the lowest score possible? gordon hamilton shows how. [ted-ed animation by anton trofimov]
@article
Dutch artist Piet Mondrian’s abstract, rectangular paintings inspired mathematicians  to create a two fold challenge. First, we must completely cover a square canvas with non overlapping rectangles. All must be unique, so if we use a 1x4,  we can’t use a 4x1 in another spot, but a 2x2 rectangle would be fine.Let’s try that. Say we have a canvas measuring 4x4. We can’t chop it directly in half, since that would give us  identical rectangles of 2x4. But the next closest option    3x4 and 1x4   works.That was easy, but we’re not done yet. Now take the area  of the largest rectangle, and subtract the area of the smallest. The result is our score, and the goal is to get  as low a score as possible. Here, the largest area is 12  and the smallest is 4, giving us a score of 8.Since we didn’t try to go  for a low score that time, we can probably do better. Let’s keep our 1x4 while breaking the 3x4  into a 3x3 and a 3x1. Now our score is 9 minus 3, or 6. Still not optimal, but better.With such a small canvas,  there are only a few options. But let’s see what happens when the canvas gets bigger. Try out an 8x8;  what’s the lowest score you can get?Pause here if you want  to figure it out yourself.Answer in: 3Answer in: 2Answer in: 1To get our bearings,  we can start as before: dividing the canvas roughly in two. That gives us a 5x8 rectangle  with area 40 and a 3x8 with area 24, for a score of 16. That’s pretty bad. Dividing that 5x8 into a 5x5  and a 5x3 leaves us with a score of 10. Better, but still not great. We could just keep dividing  the biggest rectangle. But that would leave us  with increasingly tiny rectangles, which would increase the range  between the largest and smallest.What we really want is for all our rectangles to fall within a small range of area values. And since the total area  of the canvas is 64, the areas need to add up to that. Let’s make a list  of possible rectangles and areas.To improve on our previous score, we can try to pick a range  of values spanning 9 or less and adding up to 64. You’ll notice that some values  are left out because rectangles like 1x13  or 2x9 won’t fit on the canvas. You might also realize that if you use one of the rectangles  with an odd area like 5, 9, or 15, you need to use another odd value  rectangle to get an even sum. With all that in mind,  let’s see what works.Starting with area 20 or more  puts us over the limit too quickly. But we can get to 64 using rectangles in the 14 18 range, leaving out 15. Unfortunately, there’s no way  to make them fit. Using the 2x7 leaves a gap that can only be filled  by a rectangle with a width of 1.Going lower, the next range that works is 8 to 14, leaving out the 3x3 square. This time, the pieces fit.That’s a score of 6. Can we do even better? No. We can get the same score  by throwing out the 2x7 and 1x8 and replacing them  with a 3x3, 1x7, and 1x6. But if we go any lower down the list, the numbers become so small that we’d need a wider range  of sizes to cover the canvas, which would increase the score.There’s no trick or formula here  – just a bit of intuition. It's more art than science. And for larger grids, expert mathematicians aren’t sure whether they’ve found the lowest possible scores. So how would you divide a 4x4, 10x10, or 32x32 canvas?Give it a try  and post your results in the comments.