@summary
a hostile artificial intelligence called nim has taken over the world's computers. you're the only person skilled enough to shut it down, and you'll only have one chance. can you survive and shut off the artificial intelligence? dan finkel shows how. [ted-ed animation by artrake studio]
@article
A hostile artificial intelligence called  NIM has taken over the world’s computers. You’re the only person skilled  enough to shut it down, and you’ll only have one chance.You’ve broken into NIM’s secret lab, and now you’re floating in a raft on top  of 25 stories of electrified water. You’ve rigged up a remote  that can lower the water level by ejecting it from grates  in the sides of the room. If you can lower the water level to 0, you can hit the manual override, shut NIM off, and save the day. However, the AI knows that you’re here, and it can lower the water level, too, by sucking it through a trapdoor  at the bottom of the lab. If NIM is the one to lower  the water level to 0, you’ll be sucked out of the lab, resulting in a failed mission.Control over water drainage  alternates between you and NIM, and neither can skip a turn. Each of you can lower the water level  by exactly 1, 3, or 4 stories at a time. Whoever gets the level exactly to 0 on their turn will win this deadly duel. Note that neither of you can lower  the water below 0; if the water level is at 2, then the only move is to lower  the water level 1 story.You know that NIM has already computed  all possible outcomes of the contest, and will play in a way that maximizes  its chance of success.You go first. How can you survive  and shut off the artificial intelligence? Pause here if you want  to figure it out for yourself. Answer in: 3 Answer in: 2 Answer in: 1You can’t leave anything up to chance   NIM will take any advantage it can get. And you’ll need to have a response  to any possible move it makes.The trick here is to start from where  you want to end and work backwards. You want to be the one to lower  the water level to 0, which means you need the water level  to be at 1, 3, or 4 when control switches to you. If the water level were at 2, your only option would be to lower it 1 story, which would lead  to NIM making the winning move. If we color code the water levels, we can see a simple principle at play: there are “losing” levels like 2, where no matter what whoever starts  their turn there does, they’ll lose. And there are winning levels, where whoever starts their turn there can either win or leave their opponent  with a losing level. So not only are 1, 3,  and 4 winning levels, but so are 5 and 6, since you can send your opponent  to 2 from there.What about 7? From 7, all possible moves would  send your opponent to a winning level, making this another losing level. And we can continue up  the lab in this way. If you start your turn 1, 3, or 4 levels above a losing level, then you’re at a winning level. Otherwise, you’re destined to lose.You could continue like this  all the way to level 25. But as a shortcut, you might notice that levels 8 through 11 are colored identically to 1 through 4. Since a level’s color is determined by the levels 1, 3, and 4 stories below it, this means that level 12  will be the same color as level 5, 13 will match 6, 14 will match 7, and so on,In particular, the losing levels  will always be multiple of 7, and two greater than multiples of 7. Now, from your original  starting level of 25, you have to make sure your opponent starts on a losing level every single turn— if NIM starts on a winning level  even once, it’s game over for you. So your only choice on turn 1  is to lower the water level by 4 stories. No matter what the AI does, you can continue giving it losing levels until you reach 0  and trigger the manual override.And with that, the crisis is averted. Now, back to a less stressful  kind of surfing.