@summary
consider the claw. frequently found on animals around the world, it's one of nature's most versatile tools. bears use claws for digging as well as defense. an eagle's needle-like talons can pierce the skulls of their prey. even the ancestors of primates used to wield these impressive appendages, until their claws evolved into nails. so what caused this adaptation? matthew borths investigates. [directed by augenblick studios, narrated by addison anderson, music by gdm production music].
@article
Consider the claw. Frequently found on four limbed  animals around the world, it’s one of nature’s most  versatile tools. Bears use claws for digging  as well as defense. An eagle’s needle like talons can pierce  the skulls of their prey. And lions can retract their massive claws  for easy movement, before flicking them out to hunt. Even the ancestors of primates used to  wield these impressive appendages, until their claws evolved into nails. So what in our evolutionary past led to  this manicured adaptation, and what can nails do that their  sharper cousins can’t?When nails first appeared in the fossil  record around 55.8 million years ago, claws had already been present for  over 260 million years in the ancestors of mammals and reptiles. But despite the gulf of time between  their emergence, these adaptations are both part of the  same evolutionary story. Both nails and claws are made of keratin— a tough, fibrous protein also found in  horns, scales, hooves and hair. This protein is produced by a wedge of  tissue called the keratin matrix. Rich in blood vessels and nutrients, this protein factory produces an  endless stream of keratin, which is tightly packed into cells  called keratinocytes. These high density cells give nails and  claws their trademark toughness.Since nails evolved from claws, both adaptations produce keratinocytes  in the same way. The cells grow out from the matrix, emerging from the skin where they die  and harden into a water resistant sheath. The primary difference between the  two keratin coverings is really just their shape, which depends on the shape of the bone  at the end of the animal’s digits. In claws, the bed of keratinocytes  conforms to a narrow finger bone, wrapping around the end of the digit  and radiating outwards to form a cone shaped structure. Animals with nails, on the other hand,  have much broader digits, and keratinocytes only cover the top  surface of their wide bones.It’s possible that nails have simply  persisted as a side effect of primates evolving wider,  more dexterous fingers. But given what we know about the  habitats of our primate ancestors, it’s more likely that nails came with  their own powerful advantages.High in the forest canopy where  these primates lived, wide finger bones and expansive  finger pads were ideal for gripping narrow branches. And nails improved that grip even further. By providing a rigid surface  to press against, primates could splay out their pads to  create even more contact with the trees. Additionally, nails improved the  sensitivity of their digits by providing an extra surface to detect  changes in pressure while climbing. This combination of sensitivity  and dexterity gave our ancestors the precise motor  control needed to snatch up insects, pinch berries and seeds, and keep a  firm grip on slim branches. The evolution of nails and the evolution  of opposable thumbs and toes are closely linked. And when our ancestors moved  down from the trees, this flexible grasp enabled them to create and wield complex tools.Even if it was possible for wide  fingers to sport claws, their sharp points would’ve  likely interfered with these primates’ regular tasks. Claws are ideal for piercing,  puncturing, and hooking, but their points make grabbing difficult,  and potentially dangerous. However, both claws and nails are  used in some unexpected ways. Manatees use nails to grasp their food, and researchers think elephant toenails  may sense vibrations in the ground to help them hear. Meanwhile, some primates,  like the aye ayes of Madagascar, have re acquired claws. They use these extra long appendages  to tap branches and trunks, while listening for hollow sections  with their bat like ears. When they hear an opening,  they burrow into the tree and skewer grubs with their needle like  middle finger.We’ve only scratched the surface of all  the incredible ways nails and claws are used throughout the animal kingdom. But as for which of these  adaptations is better? That’s an answer we may never nail down.