@summary
desde las películas western, hasta las cintas de terror, comedia o romance, la tecnología inmersiva y las filmaciones en 360 grados transformaran como se hacen las películas del siglo xxi. diego prilusky, el director de intel studio, comparte su trabajo innovador el cual promete desarrollar una nueva próxima fase del cine.
@article
The art of movies has existed for more than 100 years. And the way we make movies hasn't changed much from a dimensional perspective. Placing a camera and press the rec button, this has not changed at all. Cinema is still a frontal experience, and it's still perceived as such. The experience of watching movies is the same since their creation. You stand in front of a screen and look at the image displayed. In fact, there's nothing wrong with that. I love going to the movies,  watching movies on TV; the experience of watching stories in motion can be so powerful to even move us emotionally. The question we ponder on is how stories in motion can go beyond the flat screen. If we look at the media of the future  there is an opportunity to create content that adapts to new platforms. When we shoot a film, we traditionally imagine  a scene inside a frame, creating depth with foreground, middleground and background, as the camera moves. Obviously, with new devices like virtual reality  or augmented reality goggles or new smart platforms that allow us to navigate in 3D, there is an opportunity to create much more immersive content. In a way that we could move inside it and try to live the experience from a new perspective. I'm not talking about video games or computer created characters, even if they look super realistic. I'm talking about real actors. Flesh and blood performance.  Artistic performance. To do such a thing we would have to start redefining or thinking about new technologies and methodologies to enable these new experiences. We already know about 360 degree filming, putting a camera in the center that allows us to create a 360 degree immersive image. This already takes us one step further in an interaction. But it's still a frontal experience. To start investigating how we could get into the scene we would have to capture the light from all angles, putting cameras and sensors to capture all the light from all perspectives. These solutions allow us to recreate the subject in three dimensions. It would be like a 3D photograph. This allows us to not just record the image on one single plane but capture it as a volume. This is what we call volumetric video. It is the process of capturing light and storing it inside a voxel. But what is a voxel? A voxel is like a pixel  in three dimensions. Instead of being a flat square  with light information, it's like a cube in space, with position X, Y and Z, saving all the light information from all perspectives. This methodology allows us to generate a volume of light visible from all sides. And with this, we can start thinking and opening up the opportunities  for new content. Obviously, to capture and create film and scenes and stories  with this kind of solution we would have to create a space large enough to accommodate  entire scenes and montages, and powerful enough to install  hundreds of cameras and process that huge amount of information. It sounds like a crazy idea, but it's exactly what we did. For the last three years we've been building the studio of the future. We installed hundreds of cameras. And we built a gigantic dome that allows us to create exactly what we wanted. We called it Intel Studios. It is the world's largest volumetric camera, created to develop, research, and define new methodologies  for interactive content. But what does interactive content mean? What does it mean to get into the scene? To test these new hypotheses and ideas we decided, for the first time  we used the studio, to choose a classic scene. We picked a scene from the Far West. We brought scenarios, filled the studio with dirt, actors, four horses, to recreate an entire scene but this time captured from all angles. The actors, to work on these  new media, faced a challenge. They had to act flawlessly  to be seen from all angles. There is no longer a frontal position  that you just refer to. But now we have to think of all perspectives. Very similar to theater. Let's see now what came out with the first result. What you see here opened our eyes to the opportunities we can have with these new technologies and media. The result was a complete full scan of the entire scene. And it allowed us to move inside in a free way that we couldn't before. With this new solution we can see not only the image or light  emitted on a screen but also get into that light and navigate inside its volume, perceiving it from new angles. Now let's look at one of the shots  we rendered using this technology. What you will see is done entirely  with a virtual camera that moves in space. (Volumetric video) (End of volumetric video) (Applause) Thank you. As you can see, with this solution we manage to have total control of space and movement, allowing new angles and freedom  for content creation. But what else can we do  with this freedom? Can we put a virtual camera  in the eyes of the actors, from their points of view? What if instead of the actor  we chose the horse? Let's look at the same scene — there wasn't a new take — but this time, from the horse. (Volumetric video) (End of volumetric video) (Applause) No horse was harmed and no camera was placed on his head. Actually, this frees up the possibilities  of navigating within the scene. This is perfect for filmmakers or content creators as it gives them the tools  to create these new visualizations. But what about the audience? We can look into how the audience can get immersed. That's why we partnered up with Paramount Pictures. We researched how the experience and interactions within stories in motion would be like in some Hollywood movies. Together with director Randal Kleiser we got together and recreated the 1978 film Grease. Bringing 20 dancers to the stage, we recreated the song  "You're the One That I Want" in a brand new take. What you see here really allowed  the directors and us to break down the barriers of 2D thinking. And start thinking in a whole new way and let new tools come up for content and for creating new stories. But why see it in a flat way? Let's invite them to the stage. Not really, we'll bring them  in augmented reality. I'm going to use this tablet,  I'm mapping the scenario, recording the information in 3D. (Applause) Let's see what they say. (AR video) (Clapping) (End of AR video) (Applause) Thanks to the augmented dancers. As you can see, the content can be experienced as a traditional movie or as an immersive experience. It all depends on how and what we're seeing it with. We're not trying to change the traditional ways of creating content, but to enhance them. We are at a unique moment in the history of cinema, opening up and understanding new ways to create immersive content. The journey has just begun. I invite you all to join us. Thank you. (Applause)