@summary
¿qué le puede suceder a la memoria cuando la evidencia del pasado se pierde o se borra? ¿cómo podemos reconstruir la historia a través de imágenes, ó de la fotografía? el fotógrafo alejandro chaskielberg da una poderosa charla en la que habla sobre su trabajo en la comunidad de otsuchi, japón, donde él y sus colaboradores auxiliarion al pueblo a sanar y a conmemorar a sus seres queridos tras la tragedia del terremoto y tsunami tōhoku en el año 2011.
@article
Recently, my daughter and I decided  to give away some toys she no longer used. She's six years old, and asked me for a camera to take a picture of them. It was easier for her to farewell her toys if she could take a picture  before giving them away. Because she doesn't want to forget them. Because pictures help us remember. We grab our cell phones to snap when we feel something is special. When something moves us, we feel the urge to capture what we feel and keep it in an image, in a picture. However, we don't print photos on paper like we used to do, we share them in social networks, or we upload them to the cloud. Photography turned into something intangible, something virtual. But, what happens when we lose or erase our digital photos? Those in your computer, in that  hard disk or in your phone. Is there anybody here who never lost a photo? What would happen if, for some reason we would lose all of our parents' photos or other loved ones who are no longer with us? How are we to remember them? Going back to our photos from the past is like opening the doors to a dimension where lots of memories we seem to forget still remain. And those images from the past, those cherished treasures can help us propel ourselves into the future, as well. I am a nighttime photographer. I make portraits under moonlight, in nature, close to the water. I ask the people I photograph to remain still and silent for several minutes amidst darkness. Meanwhile, I walk around them to light them up and light up the landscape with lanterns. It's a moment of quietness and connection. I went off to live in the islands of the Paraná River Delta for two years. I took with me an old camera without knowing very well where I was going, neither what was I to find there. And in time I came to know the islanders, and I invited them to be photographed under the full moon to recreate their daily life routines and jobs, but at night. And I took photos of loggers, hunters and dreamers. People living in isolation, whose only direct relationship is with water, to the rhythm of the river highs and lows. And that visual work in the Delta  led me to travel around the world, and took me to Japan. I was searching for a new story to tell. I wanted to work again with a community which had some connection with water. And it happened that the curator of my exhibition, Ihiro Hayami, had relatives in a small fisher town and went with me for a visit. Ōtsuchi is located between the mountains and the sea. It's a fifteen thousand people town that in March 2011 went through the worst tragedy in its history. It was washed off by a tsunami with waves tall as a five story building. Even though the alarms went off many people didn't believe it would be so strong, and remain in their homes. As a consequence many people died, close to a 10 percent of the population. And 70 percent of houses were washed away. This is why every local in Ōtsuchi  has either friends or family who died in the tsunami. The power of the waves pulled the houses off their base and the sea gulped them up. Survivors were left with no shelter and had to endure a winter with temperatures below zero Celsius. Amidst this chaos and total destruction many people were trying to save their family photos. An officer of Japan's Self Defense Forces recovers a photo album inside a house in total ruin. There it was the picture of a child. The officer holds the album as if he were holding the child. I traveled to Ōtsuchi with my daughter who was five month old at the time. And the contrast of a baby in the middle of such desolation was impressive. People would take her off of my arms in order to kiss her. And I'd wonder how to tell this story that happened a year and a half ago. What could be positive out of such level of destruction. The first thing I found were big piles of rubble made of all kind of things. Twisted objects that speak about life as it used to be in Ōtsuchi. Like this vending machine or this fishing elements, car remains ... or what's left of a house. A lamp turned into a Moebius strip, the symbol of infinite time. As a contrast to these mountains of rubble there was this town flattened by water. The skeletons of the houses, marked on the ground were empty spaces, filled with stories. So I invited the survivors to go back to those spaces where their houses or workplaces used to exist. And many accepted, but in general, the kids didn't want to. I photographed them during the night as they remained silent and still during the ten minutes each photo took. The scenes were so sad, nothing had color. She is Haruko Okano, a librarian, and she's sitting on the remains of Ōtsuchi's Library, where she worked. This is the Second Volunteers Firefighters Squad of Ōtsuchi inside of what was the fire station. The fireman standing up was in charge of closing the anti tsunami gates. This is Yoshihiro Ogayu, monk of Kogan ji temple. The temple was a refuge in case of tsunami but even so it was destroyed. His dad and his son died there. When that first trip to Ōtsuchi was over I found a photo album in the middle of the street. It had laid there for a year and a half without having anyone pick it up. It was all wet, heavy and it stank  just like a dead animal. It was tainted with color bubbles gushing from the photos that blended together. I took a picture of it without giving it much of a thought and I came back. Once in Buenos Aires, the Ōtsuchi experience felt much like a far away dream. It filled me up with doubt: Why did I have to tell this story, if I came from the other end of the world? What did it had to do with me? Why had I photographed the survivors in black and white if the reference of my work is color? And while I made myself these questions, my own life began to crumble. Soon after breakup, my daughter's mother went off to live in another country. So I took on myself Lara's upbringing, she was a one year old baby. Project Ōtsuchi was put on hold, because now it was me the one  who had to survive and reinvent myself. And some months later, revisiting the work the family photo album image popped up again. But in this second view I grasped it in a different way. I thought I saw a painter's palette. So I took the main colors of that album to create my own color palette. And I used those colors created by the force of the tsunami to color the images of the survivors. And little by little, all the gray scenes turned into something colorful. I used color as a bridge to connect the present and the past, as the hub between their photos and mine. Now I was feeling connected with Ōtsuchi once again. Two years passed since until I was able to return to Japan  to search for other recovered photos and find new colors to paint with. There I met Mikio Komukai, a nice man who had this NGO that was recovering family photos to send them back to their owners. And with his help and the permission of Ōtsuchi's government I gained access to that impressive archive of thousand of destroyed photos. Contemplating those pictures  I realized the intangible damage the people of Ōtsuchi were facing; the damage to their memory and identity. Those blurred images  were the measure of their loss. The firefighters of Ōtsuchi. I traveled a total of six times to finish the project and publish a book. And this is the last picture I took with my two assistants,  Mayumi Suzuki and Kazuhiko Chikaoka, who both lost their parents to the tsunami. We built an arch with plastic tubes which they arranged in different positions over the remains of this house. And if you look carefully at the photo you will see that their hands  are holding this house of light. In 2016 the government of Ōtsuchi invited me to show my project, but I had a feeling that it was not over. There was something left to do. So I suggested that we put together a collective exhibition which we set up in the gymnasium of a temporary school. And we invited high school students and the people in town to take photos. Now the kids did want to join in. We gave them disposable cameras with one assignment: to tell their lives in pictures, their intimate whereabouts. Five years away from the tsunami there were children back in the streets taking photos, recording its life. And together, in community, we created a small photo archive of what Ōtsuchi is today. The people in town took pictures to create new memories: The memories of the future of Ōtsuchi. As for me, I started my own photo album telling my life and my travels with Lara. And here we are in Japan, saying goodbye to the sea of Ōtsuchi. Thank you very much. (Applause)