@summary
it was long assumed that amazons, the fierce and fearsome women warriors of greece, were imaginary. but curiously enough, stories from ancient egypt, persia, the middle east, central asia, india and china also featured amazon-like warrior women. and amazons were described in ancient historical accounts, not just myths. who were the real women warriors known as amazons? adrienne mayor investigates. [ted-ed animation by silvia prietov]
@article
Since the time of Homer, ancient stories told of fierce warriors  dwelling beyond the Mediterranean world, striking fear into the mightiest  empires of antiquity. Their exploits were recounted by many epic poets. They fought in the legendary Trojan War  and their grand army invaded Athens. Jason and the Argonauts  passed by their shores, barely avoiding their deadly arrows. These formidable fighters faced off  against the greatest champions of myth: Heracles, Theseus, and Achilles.And every single one  of these warriors was a woman.The war loving Amazons, "the equals of men" in courage and skill, were familiar to everyone in ancient Greece. Amazon battle scenes decorated  the Parthenon on the Athenian Acropolis; paintings and statues of Amazons adorned temples and public spaces. Little girls played with Amazon dolls, and Amazons were a favorite subject  on Greek vase paintings. In Greek art and literature, they were depicted as daring  and desirable, but also terrifying and deadly, and doomed to die  at the hands of Greek heroes.Were Amazons merely figures of myth, or something more?It was long assumed  that they were imaginary, like the cyclops and centaurs. But curiously enough,  stories from ancient Egypt, Persia, the Middle East, Central Asia, India, and China also featured Amazon like warrior women. And Amazons were described in ancient historical accounts, not just myths. Writers like Herodotus, Plato,  and Strabo never doubted their existence.So who were the real women  warriors known as Amazons?Ancient historians located  the Amazon homeland in Scythia, the vast territory stretching from the Black Sea across  the steppes of Central Asia. This immense region was populated  by nomadic tribes whose lives centered on horses, archery, and warfare. Their culture flourished for about 1,000 years beginning around 800 BC. Feared by Greeks, Persians, and the Chinese, the Scythians left no written records. But we can find clues in how their neighbors described them, as well as in archaeology. Scythians' ancestors were  the first to ride horses and they invented the recurve bow. And, because a female mounted archer  could be as fast and as deadly as a male, all children were trained  to ride and shoot. Women hunted and fought alongside men, using the same weapons. The harsh landscape  and their nomadic lifestyle created its own form of equality. This amazed the ancient Greeks,  whose women led restricted indoor lives.The earliest stories of the Scythians,  and Amazons, may have been exaggerated rumors. But as the Greeks began to trade around  the Black Sea and further east, their portrayals became more realistic. Early depictions of Amazons showed them  with Greek weapons and armor. But in later representations, they wielded bows and battle axes, rode horses, and wore pointed caps  and patterned trousers characteristic of steppe nomads.Until recently, no one was sure  how strong the links were between Scythians  and the Amazons of Greek myth. But recent archaeological discoveries  have provided ample evidence. More than 1,000 ancient Scythian kurgans, or burial mounds, have been excavated, containing skeletons and weapons. Archaeologists had previously assumed that weapons could only  belong to male warriors. But modern DNA analysis so far has revealed that about 300 skeletons  buried with weapons belong to females ranging in age from 10 to 45, and more are being found every year. The women's skeletons  show battle injuries: ribs slashed by swords, skulls bashed by battle axes, and arrows embedded in bones.In classical art and writings, the fearsome Amazons were always portrayed as brave and heroic. In male dominated classical Greece,  however, the very idea of strong women who gloried  in freedom and war aroused mixed feelings. And yet, the Greeks were also drawn to egalitarian ideals. Is it possible that the mythic realm  of thrilling Amazon tales was a way to imagine women and men as equal companions?