@summary
in 1884, an unlucky patient who had a rapidly growing cancer in his neck came down with an unrelated bacterial skin infection. as he recovered from the infection, the cancer surprisingly began to recede. the infection had stimulated the patient's immune system. today, synthetic biologists program bacteria to safely deliver drugs directly to tumors. how is this possible? tal danino investigates. [directed by chris bishop, narrated by addison anderson].
@article
In 1884, a patient’s luck seemed  to go from bad to worse. This patient had a rapidly growing  cancer in his neck, and then came down with an unrelated  bacterial skin infection. But soon, something unexpected happened: as he recovered from the infection,  the cancer also began to recede. When a physician named William Coley  tracked the patient down 7 years later, no visible signs of the cancer remained. Coley believed something remarkable  was happening: that the bacterial infection  had stimulated the patient’s immune system to fight off the cancer.Coley’s fortunate discovery  led him to pioneer the intentional injection of bacteria  to successfully treat cancer. Over a century later, synthetic biologists have found an even better way to use these once unlikely allies— by programming them to safely  deliver drugs directly to tumors.Cancer occurs when normal functions  of cells are altered, causing them to rapidly multiply  and form growths called tumors. Treatments like radiation, chemotherapy,  and immunotherapy attempt to kill malignant cells,  but can affect the entire body and disrupt healthy tissues  in the process.However, some bacteria like E. coli have the unique advantage of being able  to selectively grow inside tumors. In fact, the core of a tumor forms  an ideal environment where they can safely multiply,  hidden from immune cells. Instead of causing infection, bacteria can be reprogrammed  to carry cancer fighting drugs, acting as Trojan Horses  that target the tumor from within. This idea of programming bacteria  to sense and respond in novel ways is a major focus of a field called  Synthetic Biology.But how can bacteria be programmed? The key lies in manipulating their DNA. By inserting particular genetic sequences  into bacteria, they can be instructed  to synthesize different molecules, including those  that disrupt cancer growth. They can also be made  to behave in very specific ways with the help of biological circuits. These program different behaviors  depending on the presence, absence, or combination of certain factors. For example, tumors have low oxygen  and pH levels and over produce specific molecules. Synthetic biologists can program bacteria  to sense those conditions, and by doing so, respond to tumors  while avoiding healthy tissue.One type of biological circuit, known as a synchronized lysis circuit,  or SLC, allows bacteria  to not only deliver medicine, but to do so on a set schedule. First, to avoid harming healthy tissue, production of anti cancer drugs  begins as bacteria grow, which only happens  within the tumor itself. Next, after they’ve produced the drugs, a kill switch causes  the bacteria to burst when they reach a critical population  threshold. This both releases the medicine  and decreases the bacteria’s population. However, a certain percentage  of the bacteria remain alive to replenish the colony. Eventually their numbers grow large enough to trigger the kill switch again, and the cycle continues. This circuit can be fine tuned  to deliver drugs on whatever periodic schedule is best to fight the cancer.This approach has proven promising  in scientific trials using mice. Not only were scientists able  to successfully eliminate lymphoma tumors injected with bacteria, but the injection also stimulated  the immune system, priming immune cells  to identify and attack untreated lymphomas elsewhere in the mouse.Unlike many other therapies, bacteria don’t target a specific type  of cancer, but rather the general characteristics  shared by all solid tumors. Nor are programmable bacteria  limited to simply fighting cancer. Instead, they can serve  as sophisticated sensors that monitor sites of future disease. Safe probiotic bacteria could perhaps  lie dormant within our guts, where they’d detect, prevent,  and treat disorders before they have the chance  to cause symptoms.Advances in technology  have created excitement around a future of personalized medicine  driven by mechanical nanobots. But thanks to billions of years  of evolution we may already have a starting point in the unexpectedly biological  form of bacteria. Add synthetic biology to the mix, and who knows what might soon be possible.