@summary
by 1973, harvey milk had already been many things: naval officer, high school teacher, bit-part actor and wandering hippie. starting fresh in san francisco, his belief in a more personal approach to local government led him to run for office in the heart of american gay culture, the castro. lillian faderman details the tenacity and courage of california's first openly gay public official. [directed by tomás pichardo-espaillat, narrated by addison anderson, music by workplaywork and cem misirlioglu].
@article
By 1973, Harvey Milk had already been many things: naval officer, high school teacher, bit part actor, and wandering hippie. But as he embarked on yet another life  running a camera shop in San Francisco, he already found himself distracted. From the Watergate hearings  on national news, to the teacher who had to rent a projector when her school couldn’t afford one, Harvey saw a desperate need  for political reform.Milk strongly believed that tight knit  neighborhoods were essential to the fabric of the city, and that government should solve those  community’s most practical problems. From fixing potholes and putting  up stop signs, to promoting a friendly culture  of cooperation, Milk envisioned a more personal  approach to local government.This philosophy led him to run  for the city’s Board of Supervisors as the representative  for his own district, which included the heart of  American gay culture, the Castro. At this time, police brutality,  discrimination and media stereotyping plagued the LGBT community, labeling Harvey and his supporters as  political outsiders. But Milk refused to  downplay his sexuality. He was sure that gay rights could never  be won from the closet, and he saw the Castro as one of many minorities without  representation in city politics. Milk was determined to bring these  basic government services to all of San Francisco’s disenfranchised  groups, regardless of race, age, or sexuality.But despite his flair for public speaking and open hearted approach, voters couldn’t see Milk’s radical vision. In 1973, he lost his first bid for  the Board of Supervisors. In 1975, he lost again. A year later, he ran for the California  Assembly– and lost. Yet he tirelessly continued  to support his district, befriending bartenders, construction  unions, and local Chinese grocers. This earned him the affectionate title,  the "mayor of Castro Street.” And when he ran his third campaign for  the Board of Supervisors in 1977, Harvey finally won the seat– becoming one of the first openly gay  public officials in US history.Elated, Milk arrived in office determined  to make lasting change. He immediately introduced a bill outlawing discrimination on the grounds of sexuality and launched a major clean up of the city. But not everyone was happy  with this direction. Anti gay sentiment was gaining national  momentum, especially in the form of  California’s Proposition 6.The proposition, which sought  to make it illegal for homosexuals to work  in Californian schools, would prove to be the biggest battle  of Milk’s career. Supporters of Prop 6 attacked  the LGBT community, calling them unfit to work with students. But Milk urged them not to hide in fear: “Come out to your relatives. Come out to your friends,  if indeed they are your friends. Come out to your neighbors,  to your fellow workers… break down the myths. Destroy the lies and distortions. For your sake. For their sake.” Alongside other activists, he ran an incandescent campaign  against hate.On November 7, 1978, Prop 6 was defeated in a landslide. It was proof that Milk’s message was  gaining traction. But just twenty days after this  inspiring victory, he was assassinated at City Hall– killed alongside San Francisco  Mayor George Moscone.Both men had been murdered by Dan White, a former fellow supervisor, who had positioned himself against those  he called "radicals, social deviates and incorrigibles.” He had frequently clashed with Harvey  at Board meetings, and resented the spirit of change  which Milk personified for many. The night of Milk's murder, thousands marched by candlelight  through the city.In the wake of this tragedy, yet another injustice arose. In a highly controversial verdict, White received a sentence of only seven  years and eight months– a decision that sparked uproar  throughout the city in what became known as  the White Night Riots.But even after his death, Milk continued to preach  his hopeful cause. He left his friends and followers a total  of three different tapes to be played in the event  of his assassination. They leave us with a call to action, and a reminder that everyone is welcome in the fight against injustice: "I ask for the movement to continue… and if a bullet should enter my brain, let that bullet destroy  every closet door…”