@summary
it's late, pitch dark and a self-driving car winds down a narrow country road. suddenly, three hazards appear at the same time. with no human at the wheel, the car uses smart eyes, sensors that'll resolve these details all in a split-second. how is this possible? sajan saini explains how lidar and integrated photonics technology make self-driving cars a reality. [directed by artrake studio, narrated by addison anderson].
@article
It’s late, pitch dark, and a self driving  car winds down a narrow country road. Suddenly, three hazards appear  at the same time.What happens next?Before it can navigate this  onslaught of obstacles, the car has to detect them— gleaning enough information about  their size, shape, and position, so that its control algorithms  can plot the safest course. With no human at the wheel, the car needs smart eyes, sensors  that’ll resolve these details— no matter the environment,  weather, or how dark it is— all in a split second.That’s a tall order, but there’s a  solution that partners two things: a special kind of laser based probe  called LIDAR, and a miniature version of  the communications technology that keeps the internet humming, called integrated photonics.To understand LIDAR, it helps to start  with a related technology— radar. In aviation, radar antennas launch pulses  of radio or microwaves at planes to learn their locations by timing  how long the beams take to bounce back. That’s a limited way of seeing, though, because the large beam size  can’t visualize fine details. In contrast, a self driving car’s  LIDAR system, which stands for Light Detection  and Ranging, uses a narrow invisible infrared laser. It can image features as small as the  button on a pedestrian’s shirt across the street. But how do we determine the shape,  or depth, of these features?LIDAR fires a train of super short laser  pulses to give depth resolution. Take the moose on the country road. As the car drives by, one LIDAR pulse  scatters off the base of its antlers, while the next may travel to the tip  of one antler before bouncing back. Measuring how much longer  the second pulse takes to return provides data about the antler’s shape. With a lot of short pulses, a LIDAR system quickly renders a detailed profile.The most obvious way to create a pulse  of light is to switch a laser on and off. But this makes a laser unstable and  affects the precise timing of its pulses, which limits depth resolution. Better to leave it on, and use something else to periodically  block the light reliably and rapidly.That’s where integrated photonics come in. The digital data of the internet is carried by precision timed  pulses of light, some as short as a hundred picoseconds. One way to create these pulses is  with a Mach Zehnder modulator. This device takes advantage of a  particular wave property, called interference. Imagine dropping pebbles into a pond: as the ripples spread and overlap,  a pattern forms. In some places, wave peaks add  up to become very large; in other places, they completely  cancel out. The Mach Zehnder modulator  does something similar. It splits waves of light along two  parallel arms and eventually rejoins them. If the light is slowed down and  delayed in one arm, the waves recombine out of sync and  cancel, blocking the light. By toggling this delay in one arm, the modulator acts like an on/off switch,  emitting pulses of light. A light pulse lasting a hundred  picoseconds leads to a depth resolution of a  few centimeters, but tomorrow’s cars will need  to see better than that. By pairing the modulator with a super  sensitive, fast acting light detector, the resolution can be refined  to a millimeter. That’s more than a hundred times better   than what we can make out with  20/20 vision, from across a street.The first generation of automobile LIDAR  has relied on complex spinning assemblies that scan from rooftops or hoods. With integrated photonics, modulators and detectors are being shrunk  to less than a tenth of a millimeter, and packed into tiny chips that’ll one  day fit inside a car’s lights. These chips will also include a clever  variation on the modulator to help do away with moving parts  and scan at rapid speeds.By slowing the light in a modulator  arm only a tiny bit, this additional device will act more  like a dimmer than an on/off switch. If an array of many such arms, each with  a tiny controlled delay, is stacked in parallel, something novel  can be designed: a steerable laser beam.From their new vantage, these smart eyes will probe and  see more thoroughly than anything nature could’ve imagined— and help navigate any number  of obstacles. All without anyone breaking a sweat— except for maybe one disoriented moose.