@summary
in 1881, doctor william halsted rushed to help his sister minnie, who was hemorrhaging after childbirth. he quickly inserted a needle into his arm, withdrew his own blood, and transferred it to her. after a few uncertain minutes, she began to recover. what made this blood transfusion successful? bill schutt explains the history of the life-saving procedure. [directed by hype cg, narrated by addison anderson, music by gabriel maia].
@article
In 1881, doctor William Halsted  rushed to help his sister Minnie, who was hemorrhaging after childbirth. He quickly inserted  a needle into his arm, withdrew his own blood,  and transferred it to her. After a few uncertain minutes,  she began to recover.Halsted didn’t know  how lucky they’d gotten. His transfusion only worked  because he and his sister happened to have the same blood type— something that isn’t guaranteed,  even among close relatives.Blood types hadn’t been discovered  by Halsted’s time, though people had been experimenting  with transfusions for centuries— mostly unsuccessfully. In 1667, a French physician  named Jean Baptiste Denis became the first to try the technique  on a human. Denis transfused sheep’s blood  into Antoine Mauroy, a man likely suffering from psychosis, in the hopes that it would reduce  his symptoms. Afterward, Mauroy was in good spirits. But after a second transfusion,  he developed a fever, severe pain in his lower back,  intense burning in his arm, and he urinated a thick, black liquid.Though nobody knew it at the time, these were the signs of a dangerous  immune response unfolding inside his body. This immune response starts  with the production of proteins called antibodies, which distinguish the body’s  own cells from intruders. They do so by recognizing  the foreign proteins, or antigens, embedded in an intruder’s  cell membrane. Antibodies latch onto the antigens, signaling other immune cells to attack  and destroy the foreign cells.The destroyed cells are flushed  from the body in urine. In extreme cases,  the massive break down of cells causes clots in the bloodstream that  disrupt the flow of blood to vital organs, overload the kidneys,  and cause organ failure. Fortunately, Denis’s patient  survived the transfusion. But, after other cross species  transfusions proved fatal, the procedure was outlawed across Europe, falling out of favor  for several centuries.It wasn’t until 1901  that Austrian physician Karl Landsteiner discovered blood types, the crucial step in the success  of human to human blood transfusions. He noticed that when different types  were mixed together, they formed clots. This happens when antibodies  latch on to cells with foreign antigens, causing blood cells to clump together. But if the donor cells are the same  blood type as the recipient’s cells, the donor cells won’t be flagged  for destruction, and won’t form clumps.By 1907, doctors were mixing together small amounts of blood before transfusing it. If there were no clumps,  the types were a match. This enabled them  to save thousands of lives, laying the foundation  for modern transfusions.Up to this point, all transfusions  had occurred in real time, directly between two individuals. That’s because blood  begins to clot almost immediately after coming into contact with air— a defense mechanism to prevent  excessive blood loss after injury.In 1914, researchers discovered  that the chemical sodium citrate stopped blood coagulating by removing  the calcium necessary for clot formation. Citrated blood could be stored  for later use— the first step in making large scale  blood transfusions possible. In 1916, a pair of American scientists  found an even more effective anticoagulant called heparin, which works by  deactivating enzymes that enable clotting. We still use heparin today.At the same time, American and British researchers  developed portable machines that could transport donor blood  onto the battlefields of World War I. Combined with  the newly discovered heparin, medics safely stored  and preserved liters of blood, wheeling it directly onto the battlefield  to transfuse wounded soldiers.After the war, this crude portable box  would become the inspiration for the modern day blood bank,  a fixture of hospitals around the world.