@summary
in the 16th century, physician andreas vesalius described how a suffocating animal could be kept alive by inserting a tube into its trachea and blowing air to inflate its lungs. today, vesalius's treatise is recognized as the first description of mechanical ventilation— a crucial practice in modern medicine. so how do our modern ventilators work? alex gendler explains the life-saving technology. [directed by artrake studio, narrated by addison anderson].
@article
In the 16th century, Flemish physician  Andreas Vesalius described how a suffocating animal  could be kept alive by inserting a tube into its trachea and blowing air to inflate its lungs. In 1555, this procedure didn’t warrant much acclaim. But today, Vesalius’s treatise  is recognized as the first description  of mechanical ventilation— a crucial practice in modern medicine.To appreciate the value of ventilation, we need to understand how  the respiratory system works. We breathe by contracting our diaphragms,  which expands our chest cavities. This allows air to be drawn in,  inflating the alveoli— millions of small sacs inside our lungs. Each of these tiny balloons is surrounded  by a mesh of blood filled capillaries. This blood absorbs oxygen  from the inflated alveoli and leaves behind carbon dioxide. When the diaphragm is relaxed, the CO2 is exhaled alongside  a mix of oxygen and other gases.When our respiratory systems  are working correctly, this process happens automatically. But the respiratory system can be  interrupted by a variety of conditions. Sleep apnea stops diaphragm muscles from contracting. Asthma can lead to inflamed airways  which obstruct oxygen. And pneumonia, often triggered  by bacterial or viral infections, attacks the alveoli themselves. Invading pathogens kill lung cells, triggering an immune response  that can cause lethal inflammation and fluid buildup.All these situations render the lungs  unable to function normally. But mechanical ventilators  take over the process, getting oxygen into the body  when the respiratory system cannot. These machines can bypass  constricted airways, and deliver highly oxygenated air  to help damaged lungs diffuse more oxygen.There are two main ways  ventilators can work— pumping air into the patient’s lungs  through positive pressure ventilation, or allowing air to be passively drawn  in through negative pressure ventilation. In the late 19th century, ventilation techniques largely  focused on negative pressure, which closely approximates  natural breathing and provides an even distribution  of air in the lungs. To achieve this, doctors created  a tight seal around the patient’s body, either by enclosing them in  a wooden box or a specially sealed room. Air was then pumped  out of the chamber, decreasing air pressure, and allowing the patient’s chest cavity to expand more easily. In 1928, doctors developed  a portable, metal device with pumps powered  by an electric motor. This machine, known as the iron lung, became a fixture in hospitals  through the mid 20th century.However, even the most compact  negative pressure designs heavily restricted a patient’s movement and obstructed access for caregivers. This led hospitals in the 1960’s to shift  towards positive pressure ventilation. For milder cases,  this can be done non invasively. Often, a facemask is fitted  over the mouth and nose, and filled with pressurized air  which moves into the patient’s airway. But more severe circumstances require a device that takes over  the entire breathing process. A tube is inserted  into the patient’s trachea to pump air directly into the lungs, with a series of valves  and branching pipes forming a circuit for inhalation  and exhalation. In most modern ventilators, an embedded computer system allows for monitoring the patient’s  breathing and adjusting the airflow.These machines aren’t used  as a standard treatment, but rather, as a last resort. Enduring this influx of pressurized air  requires heavy sedation, and repeated ventilation  can cause long term lung damage. But in extreme situations, ventilators can be the difference  between life and death. And events like the COVID 19 pandemic have shown that they’re even more  essential than we thought. Because current models  are bulky, expensive, and require extensive training to operate, most hospitals only have a few in supply. This may be enough  under normal circumstances, but during emergencies,  this limited cache is stretched thin. The world urgently needs more low cost and portable ventilators, as well as a faster means  of producing and distributing this life saving technology.