@summary
it's an increasingly common sight in hospitals around the world: a nurse measures our height, weight, blood pressure, and attaches a glowing plastic clip to our finger. suddenly, a digital screen reads out the oxygen level in our bloodstream. how did that happen? sajan saini shows how pairing light with integrated photonics is leading to new medical technologies and less invasive diagnostic tools. [directed by artrake studio, narrated by addison anderson].
@article
It’s an increasingly common sight  in hospitals around the world: a nurse measures our height,  weight, blood pressure, and attaches a glowing plastic  clip to our finger. Suddenly, a digital screen reads out  the oxygen level in our bloodstream. How did that happen? How can a plastic clip learn something  about our blood… without a blood sample?Here’s the trick: our bodies are translucent, meaning they don’t completely  block and reflect light. Rather, they allow some light to actually pass through our skin, muscles, and blood vessels. Don’t believe it? Hold a flashlight to your thumb.Light, it turns out, can help probe the insides of our bodies.Consider that medical fingerclip— it’s called a pulse oximeter. When you inhale, your lungs transfer  oxygen into hemoglobin molecules, and the pulse oximeter measures the ratio  of oxygenated to oxygen free hemoglobin. It does this by using a tiny red LED light on one side of the fingerclip, and a small light detector on the other.When the LED shines into your finger, oxygen free hemoglobin in your blood  vessels absorbs the red light more strongly than its oxygenated  counterpart. So the amount of light that makes it out the other side depends on the concentration ratio  of the two types of hemoglobin.But any two patients will have different sized  blood vessels in their fingers. For one patient, a saturation reading of  ninety five percent corresponds to a healthy oxygen level, but for another with smaller arteries, the same reading could dangerously  misrepresent the actual oxygen level.This can be accounted for with a second  infrared wavelength LED. Light comes in a vast spectrum  of wavelengths, and infrared light lies just beyond  the visible colors. All molecules, including hemoglobin, absorb light at different efficiencies  across this spectrum. So contrasting the absorbance of red  to infrared light provides a chemical fingerprint to  eliminate the blood vessel size effect.Today, an emerging medical sensor industry is exploring all new degrees of precision chemical fingerprinting, using tiny light manipulating devices  no larger than a tenth of a millimeter. This microscopic technology, called integrated photonics, is made from wires of silicon  that guide light— like water in a pipe— to redirect, reshape, even  temporarily trap it.A ring resonator device,  which is a circular wire of silicon, is a light trapper that enhances chemical  fingerprinting. When placed close to a silicon wire, a ring siphons off and temporarily stores  only certain waves of light— those whose periodic wavelength  fits a whole number of times along the ring’s circumference. It’s the same effect at work when we pluck guitar strings. Only certain vibrating patterns dominate  a string of a particular length, to give a fundamental  note and its overtones.Ring resonators were originally  designed to efficiently route different  wavelengths of light— each a channel of digital data— in fiber optics communication networks. But some day this kind of data  traffic routing may be adapted for miniature chemical fingerprinting labs, on chips the size of a penny. These future labs on a chip may easily,  rapidly, and non invasively detect a host  of illnesses, by analyzing human saliva or sweat  in a doctor’s office or the convenience of our homes.Human saliva in particular mirrors the composition of our bodies’  proteins and hormones, and can give early warning signals for  certain cancers and infectious and autoimmune diseases. To accurately identify an illness, labs on a chip may rely on  several methods, including chemical fingerprinting, to sift through the large mix of trace  substances in a sample of spit.Various biomolecules in saliva absorb  light at the same wavelength— but each has a distinct chemical  fingerprint. In a lab on a chip, after the light passes through a saliva sample, a host of fine tuned rings may each siphon off a slightly different wavelength of light and send it to a partner light detector. Together, this bank of detectors will  resolve the cumulative chemical fingerprint  of the sample. From this information,  a tiny on chip computer, containing a library of chemical  fingerprints for different molecules, may figure out their relative  concentrations, and help diagnose a specific illness.From globe trotting communications  to labs on a chip, humankind has repurposed light to both  carry and extract information. Its ability to illuminate continues  to astonish us with new discoveries.