@summary
in the late 1800's, lynchings were happening all over the american south, often without any investigation or consequences for the murderers. a young journalist set out to expose the truth about these killings. her reports shocked the nation, launched her journalism career and a lifelong pursuit of civil rights. christina greer details the life of ida b. wells and her tireless struggle for justice. [directed by anna nowakowska, narrated by christina greer, music by matthias runge]. 
@article
In March of 1892, three Black grocery store owners  in Memphis, Tennessee, were murdered by a mob of white men. Lynchings like these were happening  all over the American South, often without any subsequent legal  investigation or consequences for the murderers. But this time, a young journalist and  friend of the victims set out to expose the truth  about these killings. Her reports would shock the nation and launch her career as an  investigative journalist, civic leader, and civil rights advocate. Her name was Ida B. Wells.Ida Bell Wells was born into slavery  in Holly Springs, Mississippi on July 16, 1862, several months before the Emancipation Proclamation released her and her family. After losing both parents and a brother  to yellow fever at the age of 16, she supported her five remaining siblings by working as a schoolteacher  in Memphis, Tennessee.During this time, she began working as a journalist. Writing under the pen name “Iola,” by the early 1890s she gained  a reputation as a clear voice against racial injustice and become co owner and editor of the Memphis Free Speech  and Headlight newspaper. She had no shortage of material: in the decades following the Civil War, Southern whites attempted to reassert  their power by committing crimes against Black people including suppressing their votes, vandalizing their businesses,  and even murdering them.After the murder of her friends, Wells launched an investigation  into lynching. She analyzed specific cases through  newspaper reports and police records, and interviewed people who had lost  friends and family to lynch mobs. She risked her life  to get this information. As a Black person investigating racially  motivated murders, she enraged many of the same southern  white men involved in lynchings.Her bravery paid off. Most whites had claimed and  subsequently reported that lynchings were responses to criminal acts by Black people. But that was not usually the case. Through her research, Wells showed that these murders  were actually a deliberate, brutal tactic to control or punish  black people who competed with whites. Her friends, for example, had been lynched when their grocery store became popular enough to divert business  from a white competitor.Wells published her findings in 1892. In response, a white mob destroyed  her newspaper presses. She was out of town when they struck, but they threatened to kill her  if she ever returned to Memphis. So she traveled to New York, where that same year she re published  her research in a pamphlet titled Southern Horrors: Lynch Law  in All Its Phases. In 1895, after settling in Chicago, she built on Southern Horrors in a longer  piece called The Red Record. Her careful documentation of the horrors  of lynching and impassioned public speeches  drew international attention.Wells used her newfound fame  to amplify her message. She traveled to Europe, where she rallied European outrage against racial violence in the American South in hopes that the US government and public would follow their example. Back in the US, she didn’t hesitate to confront powerful  organizations, fighting the segregationist  policies of the YMCA and leading a delegation  to the White House to protest discriminatory  workplace practices.She did all this while  disenfranchised herself. Women didn’t win the right to vote  until Wells was in her late 50s. And even then, the vote was primarily  extended to white women only. Wells was a key player in the battle  for voting inclusion, starting a Black women’s  suffrage organization in Chicago. But in spite of her deep commitment  to women’s rights, she clashed with white leaders  of the movement. During a march for women’s  suffrage in Washington D.C., she ignored the organizers’ attempt  to placate Southern bigotry by placing Black women in the back, and marched up front alongside the white women.She also chafed with other  civil rights leaders, who saw her as a dangerous radical. She insisted on airing, in full detail,  the atrocities taking place in the South, while others thought doing so would be  counterproductive to negotiations with white politicians. Although she participated in the founding  of the NAACP, she was soon sidelined  from the organization.Wells’ unwillingness to compromise any  aspect of her vision of justice shined a light on the weak points  of the various rights movements, and ultimately made them stronger— but also made it difficult for her  to find a place within them. She was ahead of her time, waging a tireless struggle  for equality and justice decades before many had even begun  to imagine it possible.