@summary
live and direct from new orleans, the soul rebels rock the ted stage with a tight, energetic performance blending elements of hip-hop, jazz and funk. the eight-piece brass band plays three songs -- "rebelosis," "rebel rock" and "rebel on that level" -- turning the red circle into a joyful french quarter street corner.
@article
(Music)Erion Williams: We're kind of silent in here, aren't we? How's everybody doing? Everybody all right?(Applause)Ladies and gentlemen, live and direct from New Orleans, Louisiana, we are The Soul Rebels, and we're here to party with you. Is everybody ready to get down?(Cheers)Let's do something right here, c'mon.(Music)Ladies and gentlemen, we give you with pleasure the Soul Rebel horn.(Music)Everybody put your hands together like this here.(Clapping)(Music)(Trumpet solo)(Trombone solo)(Saxophone solo)(Trumpet solo)(Trombone solo)(Music)(Music ends)(Applause)(Music)Live at TED, y'all. The Souls Rebels in the house. We're gonna do an original tune right here. We need everybody participating and getting along with this one. Let's try it.(Singing) Everybody sing rebel rock, rebel rock, rock. Sing rebel rock, rebel rock, rock. C'mon, rebel rock, rebel rock, rock. I said are you ready? C'mon, rebel rock — Get yourselves ready to get up and party, y'all. C'mon. Rebel rock, rebel rock, rock. Are you ready? C'mon, rebel rock, rebel rock — Yeah, that's what I'm talkin' about. C'mon, c'mon, c'mon. Rebel rock, rebel rock, rock. Are you ready? C'mon, rebel, rock, rebel rock, rock. Rebel rock, rebel rock, rock. Rebel rock, rebel rock, rock. Now we're at a party. Let's go!(Music)(Saxophone solo)(Music)I need everybody to get with it. Everybody, come on.(Singing) Sing soul rebel — rebel, rebel rock. Sing soul rebel — rebel, rebel rock. Sing soul rebel — rebel, rebel rock. Sing soul rebel — rebel, rebel rock. Sing soul rebel — rebel, rebel rock. Sing soul rebel — rebel, rebel rock. Sing soul rebel — rebel, rebel rock. Sing soul rebel — We're talking for a second. Everybody say, "Chuh chuh chuh chuh chuh, chuh chuh chuh, chuh chuh chuh chuh chuh chuh chuh ..." Everybody in the building say, "Rock it, don't stop it." Rock it, don't stop it. C'mon, I said the rebels be rockin'. The rebels be rockin'. Everybody say, "Kick the beat, beat, beat." Kick the beat, beat, beat. Soul Rebels rock. Soul Rebels rock. It's the hip hop. It's the hip hop. C'mon, Soul Rebels rock. Soul Rebels rock. It's the hip hop. Over here at TED tonight. Everybody c'mon.(Singing) Sing Soul Rebel — rebel, rebel rock. Sing soul rebel — rebel, rebel rock. Sing soul rebel — rebel, rebel rock. Sing soul rebel — Let's go.(Music)(Applause and cheers)Yeah! Y'all give it up for Mr. Paul Robertson on the trombone.(Applause and cheers)Mr. Corey Peyton on the trombone.(Applause and cheers)Marcus "Red" Hubbard on the trumpet.(Applause and cheers)Julian Gosin on the the trumpet.(Applause and cheers)Lumar LeBlanc on the snare drum.(Applause and cheers)Manuel Perkins on the sousaphone.(Applause and cheers)Derrick "Oops" Moss on the bass drum and percussion.(Applause and cheers)Erion Williams on the tenor saxophone. Is everybody havin' a good time tonight?(Cheers)We're gonna do one more for you — original tune titled "Rebel On That Level." Keep that handclap going, y'all. I feel it, c'mon.(Clapping)(Music)(Trombone solo)(Trumpet solo)(Music)(Music ends)(Applause and cheers)Thank you, ladies and gentlemen. The Soul Rebels. Thank you!(Applause)