@summary
like beat writers who composed their work by shredding and reassembling scraps of writing, artist jean-michel basquiat used similar techniques to remix his materials. pulling in splintered anatomy, reimagined historical scenes and skulls, he repurposed present day experiences and art history into an inventive visual language. jordana moore saggese explores the chaotic and prolific art of basquiat. [directed by héloïse dorsan rachet, narrated by christina greer, music by stephen larosa].
@article
A sky blue canvas ripped open  by an enormous skull. Teeth bared through visceral slashes  of oil and spray paint. In 2017, this untitled artwork was auctioned  off for over 110 million dollars. But it’s not the work of some old master. These strokes of genius belong to 21 year old  black Brooklynite Jean Michel Basquiat – one of America’s most  charismatic painters, and currently, its highest sold.Born in 1960 to a Haitian father  and a Puerto Rican mother, Basquiat spent his childhood making art  and mischief in Boerum Hill. While he never attended art school, he learned by wandering  through New York galleries, and listening to the music  his father played at home.He drew inspiration from  unexpected places, scribbling his own versions of cartoons,  comic books and biblical scenes on scrap paper from his father’s office. But it was a medical encyclopedia  that arguably exerted the most powerful influence on Basquiat. When young Jean Michael was hit by a car, his mother brought a copy of  "Grey’s Anatomy" to his hospital bed. It ignited a lifelong fascination  with anatomy that manifested in the skulls,  sinew and guts of his later work – which frequently explores both the power  and vulnerability of marginalized bodies.By 17, he launched his first foray into  the art world with his friend Al Diaz. They spray painted cryptic statements  and symbols all over Lower Manhattan, signed with the mysterious moniker SAMO. These humorous, profound,  and rebellious declarations were strategically scattered  throughout Soho’s art scene. And after revealing himself as the artist, Basquiat leveraged SAMO’s success  to enter the scene himself; selling postcards, playing clubs with his avant garde band, and boldly seeking out his heroes. By 21, he’d turned to painting full time.His process was a sort of  calculated improvisation. Like Beat writers who composed their work by shredding  and reassembling scraps of writing, Basquiat used similar cut up techniques  to remix his materials. When he couldn't afford canvases, he fashioned them out of discarded  wood he found on the street. He used oil stick, crayons,  spray paint and pencil and pulled quotes from the menus,  comic books and textbooks he kept open on the studio floor.He kept these sources open  on his studio floor, often working on multiple  projects at once. Pulling in splintered anatomy,  reimagined historical scenes, and skulls transplanted from  classical still lives, Basquiat repurposed both present day  experiences and art history into an inventive visual language. He worked as if inserting himself into  the legacy of artists he borrowed from, producing collages that were just as  much in conversation with art history as they were with each other. For instance, "Toussaint L’Overture versus Savonarola" and "Undiscovered Genius of the  Mississippi Delta" offer two distinct visions of Basquiat’s  historical and contemporary concerns. But they echo each other in the details, such as the reappearing head that  also resurfaces in "PPCD." All these pieces form a network that offers physical evidence of Basquiat’s restless and prolific mind.These chaotic canvases won  rapid acclaim and attention. But despite his increasingly  mainstream audience, Basquiat insisted on depicting  challenging themes of identity and oppression. Marginalized figures take center stage,  such as prisoners, cooks and janitors. His obsession with bodies, history,  and representation can be found in works evoking the  Atlantic slave trade and African history, as well as pieces focusing on  contemporary race relations.In less than a decade, Basquiat made thousands of  paintings and drawings  along with sculpture, fragments  of poetry and music. His output accelerated alongside  his meteoric rise to fame, but his life and work were  cut tragically short when he died from a drug overdose  at the age of 27. After his death, Basquiat’s work only increased in value  but the energy and flair of his pieces have impacted much more than their  financial worth. Today, his influence swirls around us in  music, poetry, fashion and film  and his art retains the power to  shock, inspire, and get under our skin.