@summary
this is episode 6 of our animated series "think like a coder." this 10-episode narrative follows a girl, ethic, and her robot companion, hedge, as they attempt to save the world. the two embark on a quest to collect three artifacts and must solve their way through a series of programming puzzles. [directed by kozmonot animation studio, narrated by addison anderson].
@article
Ethic, Hedge, and Octavia  stand on the edge of a bottomless ravine. It’s the only thing between  them and the tower that houses the second  of three powerful artifacts. They’ve got a brief window of time  to get across before the guards return.With Hedge’s fuel gauge on empty  he won’t be able to fly Ethic across, so the only option is to make a bridge. Fortunately, the floating stacks of stones nearby are bridge components— invented by Octavia herself—  called hover blocks. Activate a pile with a burst of energy, and they’ll self assemble  to span the ravine as Ethic walks across. But there is, of course, a catch. The hover blocks are only stable  when they’re perfectly palindromic. Meaning they have to form  a sequence that’s the same when viewed  forwards and backwards.The stacks start in random orders, but will always put themselves into a palindromic configuration if they can. If they get to a point  where a palindrome isn’t possible, the bridge will collapse, and whoever’s on it  will fall into the ravine.Let’s look at an example. This stack would make itself stable. First the A blocks  hold themselves in place. Then the B’s. And finally the C  would nestle right between the B’s. However, suppose there was one more A. First two A blocks form up, then two B’s, but now the remaining C and A  have nowhere to go, so the whole thing falls apart.The Node of Power enables Hedge  to energize a single stack of blocks. What instructions can Ethic give Hedge  to allow him to efficiently find and power a stable palindromic stack?Pause now to figure it out for yourself.Examples of palindromes include ANNA,  RACECAR, and MADAM IM ADAM. Counting the number of times  a given letter appears in a palindrome will reveal a helpful pattern.Pause now to figure it out for yourself.Let’s first look at a naïve solution  to this problem. A naïve solution is a simple,  brute force approach that isn’t optimized— but will get the job done. Naïve solutions are helpful ways  to analyze problems, and work as stepping stones  to better solutions.In this case, a naïve solution is to approach a pile of blocks, try all the arrangements, and see if one is a palindrome  by reading it forward and then backwards.The problem with this approach is that it would take  a tremendous amount of time. If Hedge tried one combination  every second, a stack of just 10 different blocks  would take him 42 days to exhaust. That’s because the total time  is a function of the factorial of the number of blocks there are. 10 blocks  have over 3 million combinations.What this naïve solution shows  is that we need a much faster way to tell whether a pile of blocks  can form a palindrome. To start, it may be intuitively clear  that a pile of all different blocks will never form one. Why? The first and last blocks  can’t be the same if there are no repeats. So when can a given sequence  become a palindrome?One way to figure that out  is to analyze a few existing palindromes. In ANNA,  there are 2 A’s and 2 N’s. RACECAR  has 2 R’s, 2 A’s, 2 C’s, and 1 E. And MADAM IM ADAM  has 4 M’s, 4 A’s, 2 D’s, and 1 I.The pattern here  is that most of the letters occur an even number of times, and there’s at most 1  that occurs just once. Is that it? What if RACECAR had 3 E’s instead of 1? We could tack the new E’s onto the ends  and still get a palindrome, so 3 is ok. But make that 3 E’s and 3 C’s,  and there’s nowhere for the last C to go. So the most generalized insight is that at most one letter can appear  an odd number of times, but the rest have to be even.Hedge can count the letters in each stack  and organize them into a dictionary, which is a tidy way  of storing information. A loop could then go through and count  how many times odd numbers appear. If there are less than 2 odd characters,  the stack can be made into a palindrome.This approach is much, much faster  than the naïve solution. Instead of factorial time,  it takes linear time. That’s where the time increases in proportion to  the number of blocks there are.Now write a loop for Hedge  to approach the piles individually, and stop when he finds a good one,  and you’ll be ready to go.Here’s what happens:Hedge is fast, but there are so many piles it takes a long time. Too long.Ethic and Hedge are safe. But Octavia is not so lucky.