@summary
consider the spot where you're sitting. travel backwards in time and it might've been submerged at the bottom of a shallow sea, buried under miles of rock or floating through a molten landscape. but go back about 4.6 billion years, and you'd be in the middle of an enormous cloud of dust and gas orbiting a newborn star. what exactly is this cosmic dust? lorin matthews investigates. [directed by frederic siegel (team tumult), narrated by addison anderson, music by alon peretz].
@article
Consider the spot where you’re sitting. Travel backwards in time and it might’ve been submerged at  the bottom of a shallow sea, buried under miles of rock, or floating through a molten,  infernal landscape. But go back far enough— about 4.6 billion years, and you’d be in the middle of an enormous  cloud of dust and gas orbiting a newborn star. This is the setting for some of the  biggest, smallest mysteries of physics: the mysteries of cosmic dust bunnies.Seemingly empty regions  of space between stars actually contain clouds of gas and dust, usually blown there by supernovas. When a dense cloud reaches a certain  threshold called the Jeans mass, it collapses in on itself. The shrinking cloud rotates faster  and faster, and heats up, eventually becoming hot enough to burn  hydrogen in its core. At this point a star is born. As fusion begins in the new star, it sends out jets of gas that blow  off the top and bottom of the cloud, leaving behind an orbiting ring of gas  and dust called a protoplanetary disk. This is a surprisingly windy place; eddies of gas carry particles apart,  and send them smashing into each other. The dust consists of tiny metal fragments, bits of rock, and, further out, ices.We’ve observed thousands of these disks  in the sky, at various stages of development as dust clumps together into larger and larger masses.Dust grains 100 times smaller than the  width of a human hair stick to each other through what’s called  the van der Waals force. That’s where a cloud of electrons  shifts to one side of a molecule, creating a negative charge on one end,  and a positive charge on the other. Opposites attract, but van der Waals can  only hold tiny things together.And there’s a problem: once dust  clusters grow to a certain size, the windy atmosphere of a disk should  constantly break them up as they crash into each other. The question of how they continue to grow is the first mystery of dust bunnies.One theory looks to electrostatic charge  to answer this. Energetic gamma rays, x rays,  and UV photons knock electrons off of gas  atoms within the disk, creating positive ions  and negative electrons. Electrons run into and stick to dust, making it negatively charged. Now, when the wind pushes  clusters together, like repels like  and slows them down as they collide. With gentle collisions  they won’t fragment, but if the repulsion is too strong,  they’ll never grow. One theory suggests that high energy  particles can knock more electrons off of some  dust clumps, leaving them positively charged. Opposites again attract,  and clusters grow rapidly.But before long we reach  another set of mysteries. We know from evidence found in meteorites that these fluffy dust bunnies  eventually get heated, melted and then cooled into solid  pellets called chondrules. And we have no idea how  or why that happens. Furthermore, once those pellets do form, how do they stick together? The electrostatic forces from before  are too weak, and small rocks can’t be held together  by gravity either. Gravity increases proportionally to the  mass of the objects involved. That’s why you could effortlessly escape  an asteroid the size of a small mountain using just the force generated  by your legs. So if not gravity, then what? Perhaps it’s dust. A fluffy dust rim collected around the  outside of the pellets could act like Velcro. There’s evidence for this in meteors, where we find many chondrules surrounded by a thin rim of very fine material– possibly condensed dust.Eventually the chondrule pellets get  cemented together inside larger rocks, which at about 1 kilometer across are finally large enough to hold  themselves together through gravity. They continue to collide and grow  into larger and larger bodies, including the planets we know today.Ultimately, the seeds of  everything familiar– the size of our planet, its position  within the solar system, and its elemental composition– were determined by an uncountably large  series of random collisions. Change the dust cloud just a bit, and perhaps the conditions wouldn’t  have been right for the formation of life on our planet.