@summary
self-driving cars are already cruising the streets today. and while these cars will ultimately be safer and cleaner than their manual counterparts, they can't completely avoid accidents altogether. how should the car be programmed if it encounters an unavoidable accident? patrick lin navigates the murky ethics of self-driving cars. 
@article
This is a thought experiment.Let's say at some point in the not so distant future, you're barreling down the highway in your self driving car, and you find yourself boxed in on all sides by other cars. Suddenly, a large, heavy object falls off the truck in front of you. Your car can't stop in time to avoid the collision, so it needs to make a decision: go straight and hit the object, swerve left into an SUV, or swerve right into a motorcycle. Should it prioritize your safety by hitting the motorcycle, minimize danger to others by not swerving, even if it means hitting the large object and sacrificing your life, or take the middle ground by hitting the SUV, which has a high passenger safety rating? So what should the self driving car do?If we were driving that boxed in car in manual mode, whichever way we'd react would be understood as just that, a reaction, not a deliberate decision. It would be an instinctual panicked move with no forethought or malice. But if a programmer were to instruct the car to make the same move, given conditions it may  sense in the future, well, that looks more like premeditated homicide.Now, to be fair, self driving cars are are predicted  to dramatically reduce traffic accidents and fatalities by removing human error  from the driving equation. Plus, there may be all sorts  of other benefits: eased road congestion, decreased harmful emissions, and minimized unproductive and stressful driving time. But accidents can and will still happen, and when they do, their outcomes may be determined months or years in advance by programmers or policy makers. And they'll have  some difficult decisions to make. It's tempting to offer up general  decision making principles, like minimize harm, but even that quickly leads  to morally murky decisions.For example, let's say we have the same initial set up, but now there's a motorcyclist  wearing a helmet to your left and another one without  a helmet to your right. Which one should  your robot car crash into? If you say the biker with the helmet because she's more likely to survive, then aren't you penalizing  the responsible motorist? If, instead, you save the biker  without the helmet because he's acting irresponsibly, then you've gone way beyond the initial design principle about minimizing harm, and the robot car is now  meting out street justice.The ethical considerations  get more complicated here. In both of our scenarios, the underlying design is functioning as a targeting algorithm of sorts. In other words, it's systematically favoring  or discriminating against a certain type  of object to crash into. And the owners of the target vehicles will suffer the negative consequences of this algorithm through no fault of their own.Our new technologies are opening up many other novel ethical dilemmas. For instance, if you had to  choose between a car that would always save as many lives as possible in an accident, or one that would save you at any cost, which would you buy? What happens if the cars start analyzing and factoring in the passengers of the cars and the particulars of their lives? Could it be the case  that a random decision is still better than a predetermined one designed to minimize harm? And who should be making  all of these decisions anyhow? Programmers? Companies? Governments?Reality may not play out exactly like our thought experiments, but that's not the point. They're designed to isolate  and stress test our intuitions on ethics, just like science experiments do for the physical world. Spotting these moral hairpin turns now will help us maneuver the unfamiliar road of technology ethics, and allow us to cruise confidently and conscientiously into our brave new future.