@summary
on the coast of northern ireland, a vast plateau of basalt slabs and columns called the giant's causeway stretches into the ocean. the scientific explanation for this is that it's the result of molten lava contracting and fracturing as it cooled in the wake of a volcanic eruption. but an ancient irish myth has a different accounting. iseult gillespie recounts the giant's causeway myth. [ted-ed animation by dylan glynn]
@article
On the coast of Northern Ireland, a vast plateau of basalt slabs and columns called the Giant’s Causeway stretches into the ocean. The scientific explanation for this is that it’s the result of molten lava contracting and fracturing as it cooled in the wake  of a volcanic eruption. But an ancient Irish myth  has a different accounting.According to legend, the giant Finn MacCool lived happily  on the North Antrim coast with his wife Oonagh. Their only disturbance came from the taunts and threats of the giant Benandonner, or the red man,  who lived across the sea in Scotland. The two roared insults  and hurled rocks at each other in dramatic shows of strength.Once, Finn tore up a great clump of land  and heaved it at his rival, but it fell short of reaching land. Instead, the clump became the Isle of Man, and the crater left from the disturbed earth filled with water to become Lough Neagh. The giants’ tough talk continued, until one day Benandonner challenged  Finn to a fight, face to face. And so the Irish giant tossed  enough boulders into the sea to create a bridge of stepping  stones to the Scottish coast.Finn marched across in a fit of rage. When Scotland loomed before him, he made out the figure  of Benandonner from afar. Finn was a substantial size, but at the sight of his colossal enemy thundering towards him, his courage faltered. With one look at Benandonner’s thick neck and crushing fists, Finn turned and ran.Back home, with Benandonner  fast approaching, Finn trembled as he described  his enemy’s bulk to Oonagh. They knew that if he faced  Benandonner head on, he’d be crushed. And so Oonagh hatched a cunning plan   they needed to create an illusion of size, to suggest Finn was a mountain  of a man whilst keeping him out of sight.As Benandonner neared  the end of the bridge, Oonagh stuffed her husband  in a huge cradle. Disguised as an enormous baby, Finn lay quiet as Benandonnner  pounded on the door. The house shook as he stepped inside.Oonagh told the enraged visitor  that her husband wasn’t home, but welcomed him to sit and eat while he waited. When Benandonner tore into the cakes  placed before him, he cried out in pain for he’d shattered his teeth  on the metal Oonagh had concealed inside. She told him that this  was Finn’s favorite bread, sowing a seed of doubt  in Benandonner’s mind that he was any match for his rival.When Finn let out a squawk, Benandonner’s attention was drawn  to the gigantic baby in the corner. So hefty was the infant swaddled  under piles of blankets, Benandonner shuddered at the thought  of what the father would look like. He decided he’d rather not find out.As he fled, Benandonner tore up the rocks  connecting the shores, breaking up the causeway. What remains are two identical  rock formations: one on the North Antrim coast of Ireland and one at Fingal’s Cave in Scotland,  right across the sea.