@summary
in 1972, thomas sankara was swept into the revolution seeking to wrest control of madagascar from france's lingering colonial rule. the protests inspired the west african native to read works by socialist leaders and seek wisdom from military strategy. leaving madagascar in 1973, he was determined to free his country from its colonial legacy. lisa bacon details the life of the revolutionary icon. [directed by tomás pichardo-espaillat, narrated by christina greer, music by workplaywork / cem misirlioglu].
@article
In 1972, Thomas Sankara  was swept into a revolution for a country not his own. Hailing from the West African nation  of Burkina Faso— then known as Upper Volta— the 22 year old soldier  had travelled to Madagascar to study at their military academy. But upon arriving,  he found a nation in conflict. Local revolutionaries  sought to wrest control of Madagascar from France’s lingering colonial rule. These protestors  inspired Sankara to read works by socialist leaders like Karl Marx and seek wisdom from military strategy. When he returned to Upper Volta in 1973, Sankara was determined to free  his country from its colonial legacy.Born in 1949, Sankara was raised  in a relatively privileged household as the third of ten children. His parents wanted him to be a priest,  but like many of his peers, Sankara saw the military  as the perfect institution to rid Upper Volta of corruption. After returning from Madagascar, he became famous for his charisma  and transparent oratorial style— but he was less popular  with the reigning government.Led by President Jean Baptiste Ouédraogo, this administration came to power  in the 3rd consecutive coup d’état in Upper Volta’s recent history. The administration’s policies  were a far cry from the sweeping changes  Sankara proposed, but, by 1981,  Sankara’s popularity won out, earning him a role  in Ouédraogo’s government. Nicknamed “Africa’s Che Guevara,"  Sankara rapidly rose through the ranks, and within two years,  he was appointed Prime Minister. In his new role,  he delivered rallying speeches to impoverished communities,  women, and young people. He even tried to persuade  other governments to form alliances based on their shared colonial legacy. But Ouédraogo and his advisors  felt threatened by Sankara’s new position. They thought his communist beliefs would  harm alliances with capitalist countries, and just months  after becoming Prime Minister, Ouédraogo’s administration  forced Sankara from the job and placed him on house arrest.Little did the President know this act would fuel Upper Volta’s  4th coup d’état in 17 years. Civilian protests  ensued around the capital, and the government ground to a halt while Sankara tried to negotiate  a peaceful transition. During this time, Blaise Compaoré, Sankara’s friend  and fellow former soldier, foiled another coup that included  an attempt on Sankara’s life. Eventually, Ouédraogo resigned  without further violence, and on August 4, 1983, Thomas Sankara  became the new President of Upper Volta.Finally in charge,  Sankara launched an ambitious program for social and economic change. As one of his first agenda items,  he renamed the country from its French colonial title  "Upper Volta" to "Burkina Faso," which translates  to “Land of Upright Men." Over the next four years he established  a nation wide literacy campaign, ordered the planting  of over 10 million trees, and composed a new national anthem— all while cutting down  inflated government employee salaries. But perhaps the most unique element  of Sankara’s revolution was his dedication to gender equality. He cultivated a movement  for women’s liberation, outlawing forced marriages,  polygamy and genital mutilation. He was the first African leader to appoint women to key political positions and actively recruit them to the military.However, Sankara’s socialist policies  were met with much resistance. Many students and elites  believed his economic plans would alienate Burkina Faso  from its capitalist peers. His crackdown  on the misuse of public funds turned government officials  against him as well. After four years,  what began as an empowering revolution had isolated many influential Burkinabes. But Sankara was not ready  to yield his power. He executed  increasingly authoritarian actions, including banning trade unions  and the free press. Eventually, his autocratic tendencies turned even his closest friends  against him.On October 15, 1987, Sankara was conducting a meeting  when a group of assailants swarmed his headquarters. Sankara was assassinated in the attack, and many believe the raid was ordered  by his friend Blaise Compaoré.Though his legacy is complicated, many of Sankara’s policies have proven  themselves to be ahead of their time. In the past decade, Burkinabe youth have celebrated  Sankara’s political philosophy, and nearby countries like Ghana have even  adopted Sankara’s economic models. On March 2, 2019 a statue of Sankara  was erected in Burkina Faso’s capital, establishing his place  as an icon of revolution for his country and throughout the world.