@summary
hercules — son of zeus and champion of humankind — stricken with a temporary curse of madness, has just committed the most unspeakable crime imaginable. seeking to atone for the deaths of his family, hercules must complete twelve impossible tasks that pit him against invincible monsters and unfathomable forces. alex gendler retells this epic series of adventures. [ted-ed animation by jérémie balais & jeff le bars].
@article
Hercules, son of Zeus  and champion of humankind, gazed in horror as he realized he had just committed  the most unspeakable crime imaginable. The goddess Hera, who hated Hercules  for being born of her husband’s adultery, had stricken him  with a temporary curse of madness. And his own family were the casualties.Consumed by grief, Hercules sought out  the Oracle of Delphi, who told him the path to atonement lay with his cousin, King Eurystheus of Tiryns,  a favorite of Hera’s. Eurystheus hoped to humiliate Hercules  with ten impossible tasks that pitted him against  invincible monsters and unfathomable forces. Instead, the king set the stage  for an epic series of adventures that would come to be known  as the Labors of Hercules.The first labor was  to slay the Nemean Lion, who kidnapped women  and devoured warriors. Its golden fur was impervious to arrows, but Hercules cornered  the lion in its dark cave, stunned it with a club, and strangled it with his bare hands. He found no tool sharp enough  to skin the beast, until the goddess Athena suggested  using one of its own claws. Hercules returned to Tiryns  wearing the lion’s hide, frightening King Eurystheus so much  that he hid in a wine jar. From then on, Hercules was ordered to present his trophies  at a safe distance.The second target was the Lernaean Hydra, a giant serpent with many heads. Hercules fought fiercely, but every time he cut one head off, two more grew in its place. The battle was hopeless until his nephew Iolaus thought  to cauterize the necks with fire, keeping the heads from regrowing. The dead serpent’s remains  became the Hydra constellation.Instead of slaying a beast,  Hercules next had to catch one, alive. The Ceryneian Hind was a female deer  so fast it could outrun an arrow. Hercules tracked it for a year, finally trapping it in the northern land  of Hyperborea. The animal turned out to be sacred  to Artemis, goddess of the hunt, and Hercules swore to return it. When Eurystheus saw the hind,  he demanded to keep it instead, but as soon as Hercules let go, the animal ran to its mistress. Thus, Hercules completed his task  without breaking his promise.The fourth mission was to capture  the Erymanthian boar, which had ravaged many fields.  Advised by the wise centaur Chiron, Hercules trapped it  by chasing it into thick snow.For the fifth task, there were no animals, just their leftovers. The stables where King Augeas  kept his hundreds of divine cattle had not been maintained in ages. Hercules promised to clean them in one day if he could keep one tenth  of the livestock. Augeas expected the hero to fail. Instead, Hercules dug massive trenches, rerouting two nearby rivers to flow  through the stables until they were spotless.Next came three more beastly foes, each requiring  a clever strategy to defeat. The carnivorous Stymphalian birds  nested in an impenetrable swamp, but Hercules used Athena’s special rattle  to frighten them into the air, at which point he shot them down. No mortal could stand before  the Cretan bull’s mad rampage, but a chokehold  from behind did the trick. And the mad King Diomedes, who had trained his horses  to devour his guests, got a taste of his own medicine when Hercules wrestled him  into his own stables. The ensuing feast calmed the beasts  enough for Hercules to bind their mouths.But the ninth labor involved someone  more dangerous than any beast, Hippolyta, Queen of the Amazons. Hercules was to retrieve the belt given to her by her father Ares, the god of war. He sailed to the Amazon land of Themyscira prepared for battle, but the queen was so impressed  with the hero and his exploits that she gave the belt willingly.For his tenth labor, Hercules had to steal a herd  of magical red cattle from Geryon, a giant with three heads and three bodies. On his way, Hercules was so annoyed  by the Libyan desert heat that he shot an arrow at the Sun. The sun god Helios admired  the hero’s strength and lent his chariot for the journey  to the island of Erytheia. There, Hercules fought off  Geryon’s herdsman and his two headed dog,  before killing the giant himself.That should have been the end. But Eurystheus announced  that two labors hadn’t counted: the Hydra, because Iolaus  had helped Hercules kill it, and the stables,  because he’d accepted payment. And so, the hero set  about his eleventh task, obtaining golden apples from  the garden of the Hesperides nymphs.Hercules began by catching  the Old Man of the Sea and holding the shape shifting water god until he revealed the garden’s location. Once there, the hero found the titan Atlas holding up the heavens. Hercules offered to take his place  if Atlas would retrieve the apples. Atlas eagerly complied, but Hercules then tricked him into trading places again, escaping with apples in hand.The twelfth and final task  was to bring back Cerberus, the three headed hound  guarding the underworld. Helped by Hermes and Athena,  Hercules descended and met Hades himself. The lord of the dead allowed Hercules  to take the beast if he could do it without weapons, which he achieved by grabbing  all three of its heads at once. When he presented the hound  to a horrified Eurystheus, the king finally declared  the hero’s service complete.After 12 years of toil, Hercules had redeemed the tragic deaths  of his family and earned a place in the divine pantheon. But his victory held  an even deeper importance. In overcoming the chaotic  and monstrous forces of the world, the hero swept away what remained  of the Titans’ primordial order, reshaping it into one  where humanity could thrive. Through his labors, Hercules tamed the world’s madness  by atoning for his own.