@summary
at the age of 21, simone de beauvoir became the youngest person to take the philosophy exams at france's most esteemed university. but as soon as she mastered the rules of philosophy, she wanted to break them. her desire to explore the physical world to its fullest would shape her life, and eventually, inspire radical new philosophies. iseult gillespie explores the life of the revolutionary thinker. [directed by sarah saidan, narrated by bethany cutmore-scott, music by stephen larosa].
@article
At the age of 21, Simone de Beauvoir  became the youngest person to take the philosophy exams at France’s most esteemed university. She passed with flying colors. But as soon as she mastered  the rules of philosophy, she wanted to break them. She’d been schooled  on Plato’s Theory of Forms, which dismissed the physical world  as a flawed reflection of higher truths and unchanging ideals. But for de Beauvoir,  earthly life was enthralling, sensual, and anything but static. Her desire to explore the physical world  to its fullest would shape her life, and eventually,  inspire a radical new philosophy.Endlessly debating with her romantic  and intellectual partner Jean Paul Sartre, de Beauvoir explored free will, desire,  rights and responsibilities, and the value of personal experience. In the years following WWII, these ideas would converge  into the school of thought most closely associated with their work:  existentialism.Where Judeo Christian traditions  taught that humans are born with preordained purpose, de Beauvoir and Sartre proposed  a revolutionary alternative. They argued that humans are born free, and thrown into existence  without a divine plan. As de Beauvoir acknowledged, this freedom  is both a blessing and a burden. In "The Ethics of Ambiguity" she argued  that our greatest ethical imperative is to create our own life’s meaning, while protecting the freedom  of others to do the same. As de Beauvoir wrote, “A freedom which is interested only  in denying freedom must be denied.”This philosophy challenged its students  to navigate the ambiguities and conflicts our desires produce,  both internally and externally. And as de Beauvoir sought to find  her own purpose, she began to question: if everyone deserves  to freely pursue meaning, why was she restricted by society’s ideals of womanhood?Despite her prolific writing,  teaching and activism, de Beauvoir struggled  to be taken seriously by her male peers. She’d rejected her Catholic upbringing  and marital expectations to study at university, and write memoirs, fiction and philosophy. But the risks she was taking  by embracing this lifestyle were lost on many  of her male counterparts, who took these freedoms for granted. They had no intellectual interest  in de Beauvoir’s work, which explored women’s inner lives, as well the author’s open relationship  and bisexuality. To convey the importance  of her perspective, de Beauvoir embarked  on her most challenging book yet. Just as she’d created the foundations  of existentialism, she’d now redefine the limits of gender.Published in 1949, "The Second Sex"  argues that, like our life’s meaning, gender is not predestined. As de Beauvoir famously wrote, “one is not born, but rather becomes,  woman.” And to “become” a woman, she argued,  was to become the Other. De Beauvoir defined Othering  as the process of labeling women as less than the men who’d  historically defined, and been defined as, the ideal human subjects. As the Other, she argued that women  were considered second to men, and therefore systematically restricted  from pursuing freedom."The Second Sex" became  an essential feminist treatise, offering a detailed history  of women’s oppression and a wealth of anecdotal testimony. "The Second Sex"’s combination  of personal experience and philosophical intervention provided a new language  to discuss feminist theory. Today, those conversations are still  informed by de Beauvoir’s insistence that in the pursuit of equality, “there is no divorce between  philosophy and life.”Of course, like any foundational work, the ideas in "The Second Sex" have been  expanded upon since its publication. Many modern thinkers have explored  additional ways people are Othered that de Beauvoir doesn’t acknowledge. These include racial  and economic identities, as well as the broader spectrum of gender  and sexual identities we understand today.De Beauvoir’s legacy  is further complicated by accusations of sexual misconduct  by two of her university students. In the face of these accusations, she had her teaching license revoked  for abusing her position.In this aspect and others,  de Beauvoir’s life remains controversial— and her work represents a contentious  moment in the emergence of early feminism. She participated in those conversations  for the rest of her life; writing fiction, philosophy,  and memoirs until her death in 1986. Today, her work offers  a philosophical language to be reimagined, revisited  and rebelled against— a response this revolutionary thinker  might have welcomed.