@summary
in 1943, allied aircraft rained tens of thousands of leaflets on nazi germany below. the leaflets urged readers to renounce hitler, to fight furiously for the future— and to never give up hope. their call to action rippled through homes and businesses— and their message even reached concentration camps. they were signed: the white rose. iseult gillespie details the story of the resistance group. [directed by wow-how studio, narrated by bethany cutmore-scott, music by cem misirlioglu / workplaywork].
@article
In 1943 Allied aircraft swooped  over Nazi Germany, raining tens of thousands of  leaflets on people below. Written by anonymous Germans, the  leaflets urged readers to renounce Hitler, to fight furiously for the future—  and to never give up hope.Their call to action rippled through  homes and businesses— and news of their message even reached  concentration camps and prisons. It was only after the war had ended  that the authors’ identities, stories, and tragic fate would come to light.When Hitler seized power  10 years earlier, Hans and Sophie Scholl were teenagers  in the town of Forchtenberg. At that time, fear, propaganda,  and surveillance kept all aspects of life for the Scholl  family and millions of other Germans under Nazi control.The government specifically  targeted young people, setting up institutions to regulate their  behavior and police their thoughts. As teenagers, Hans was a member  of the Hitler Youth and Sophie joined The League  of German Girls.Hans rose through the ranks and oversaw the training and  indoctrination of other young people. In 1936, he was chosen to carry  the flag at a national rally. But when he witnessed the zeal  of Nazi rhetoric, he began to question it for  the first time.Meanwhile, Sophie was also starting to  doubt the information she was being fed. Their parents Robert and Magdalena, who had feared they were losing  their children to Nazi ideology, encouraged these misgivings. At home, Robert and Magdalena listened  to foreign radio stations that the government first discouraged  and later banned. While the government churned out national broadcasts which denied Nazi atrocities, the Scholls learned shocking truths.And yet, they were still subject to  the rules of life in Hitler’s Germany. After the outbreak of war, Sophie reluctantly worked for  the national effort, and Hans had to take on army duties  while attending medical school in Munich.That was where Hans met Christoph Probst,  Willi Graf and Alexander Schmorell. Day by day, each grew more  sickened by Nazi ideology. They longed to share their views. But how could they spread them, when it  was impossible to know who to trust?And so, the friends decided  to rebel anonymously. They pooled their money and  bought printing materials. An acquaintance let them use  a cellar under his studio. In secret, they began drafting  their message.In June 1942, mysterious anti Nazi  leaflets began appearing all over Munich. They were signed: the White Rose.The first leaflet denounced Hitler and called for Germans to  sabotage the war effort: “Adopt passive resistance… block the functioning of this atheistic  war machine before it is too late, before the last city is a heap of rubble… before the last youth of our  nation bleeds to death... Don’t forget that each people gets  the government it deserves!” At a time when a sarcastic remark  could constitute treason, this language was unprecedented. It was written mostly by Hans Scholl.In 1942, Sophie came to Munich knowing  nothing of her brother’s activities. She soon encountered the  leaflets at school. But it was not until she discovered  evidence in Han’s room that she realized who’d written them. Her shock soon gave way to resolve:  she wanted in. For both siblings, it was time to escalate the fury that had been brewing for years.From June 1942 to February 1943,  the group worked feverishly. While the Gestapo searched for leads, the White Rose were constantly on guard.The war raged on. Regulations tightened,  and Munich suffered air raids. But the White Rose ventured  deeper into conspiracy. They graffitied buildings and braved  trains swarming with Gestapo. In the winter of 1942, Hans made a treacherous journey to  the Czechoslovakian border to meet anti Nazi rebels.On February 18, 1943, Sophie and Hans brought a suitcase  of leaflets to their university. A custodian noticed what they were doing  and reported them to the Gestapo.Both calmly denied any involvement— until the police gathered all the leaflets and placed them back in the empty case, where they fit perfectly. When Hans and Sophie confessed, they were immediately led to court  and sentenced to death by guillotine. Despite a grueling interrogation, the two  refused to betray their co conspirators.Before her execution, Sophie declared  her fury at the state of her country. But she also spoke to a  more hopeful future: “How can we expect righteousness to  prevail when there is hardly anyone willing to give himself up individually  to a righteous cause? Such a fine, sunny day, and I have to go, but what does my death matter,  if through us, thousands of people are awakened  and stirred to action?”