@summary
is it a fuzzy sock? an overripe banana? a moldy tube of toothpaste? in fact, it's a humble sea cucumber: a brainless, fleshy form surrounding a digestive tract, and bookended by a mouth and an anus. and while it might look odd, its daily toil paves the way for entire ecosystems to thrive. cella wright journeys to the bottom of the ocean to explore the lives of these sausage-shaped wonders. [directed by guto br, flávia godoy and lívia serri francoio, narrated by bethany cutmore-scott, music by jarrett farkas].
@article
Can you guess what you’re looking at? Is it a fuzzy sock? An overripe banana?  A moldy tube of toothpaste? In fact, this is the humble sea cucumber,  and while it might look odd, its daily toil paves the way  for entire ecosystems to thrive.Sea cucumbers are members  of the phylum Echinodermata, along with sea urchins, starfish  and other radially symmetrical, “spiny skinned” marine invertebrates. Some sea cucumbers have feathery tentacles flowing from their mouths, some are puffed like bloated balloons, and others simply look like  Headless Chicken Monsters— the actual name given  to a rare deep sea species. But they are generally characterized  by their long, cylindrical shape. A sea cucumber is essentially a brainless, fleshy form surrounding a digestive tract, bookended by a mouth and an anus.Adhesive tube feet  run the length of their bodies and allow them to scoot along  the seafloor. Specialized tube feet can be used  for feeding and respiration, though many sea cucumbers actually  breathe through their anuses. Rhythmically contracting and relaxing  their muscles, they draw water in and out  over an internal lung like structure called a respiratory tree that extracts oxygen from seawater.Certain species of crabs and pearlfish take advantage of this  rhythmic action and, once the sea cucumber’s anus is dilated, they shimmy in and take shelter. The rear end of a single sea cucumber can  harbor up to fifteen pearlfish at a time. However, it seems that not all  sea cucumbers put up with this intrusive behavior. Some species are equipped with five teeth around their anus, suggesting that they may have taken an evolutionary stand against unwanted guests.But even sea cucumbers  that lack anal teeth are outfitted with tools  to defend themselves. They evade threats  and launch counter attacks using their mutable collagenous tissue,  or MCT. This gel like tissue contains  bundles of collagen, called “fibrils.” Proteins can interact with these fibrils  to slide them together, stiffening the tissue, or apart,  softening it. This versatile tissue has many advantages: it aids in efficient locomotion, enables sea cucumbers  to fit into small spaces, and allows them to reproduce  asexually by splitting apart. But MCT’s most explosive application  is employed when a predator attacks.By loosening the attachments  of internal tissues then quickly softening  and contracting their muscles, many species are capable of shooting  a wide range of organs out of their anuses. This act is called “evisceration” and it’s a surprisingly effective  defense mechanism. In addition to startling  and distracting predators, the innards of some sea cucumber  species are sticky and toxic. Evisceration may seem drastic, but sea cucumbers are able to regenerate  what they’ve lost to their gut reaction in just a few weeks’ time.Aside from the few species  that have evolved to swim and those that feed without moving, many of these cumbersome creatures  pass their time grazing the seabed. Sea cucumbers are found everywhere  from shallow shores to abyssal trenches 6,000 meters  below sea level. On the deep sea floor, they comprise  the majority of animal biomass, reaching up to 95% in some areas.As these sausage shaped wonders  trudge along, they vacuum up sand, digest the organic matter it contains,  and excrete the byproduct. In this process, sea cucumbers clean  and oxygenate the seafloor by breaking down detritus  and recycling nutrients. This creates the conditions for sea grass  beds and shellfish to thrive. Sea cucumber excretions can also aid  in coral formation and may play a role in buffering marine  environments from ocean acidification. As the ocean’s vacuum cleaners,  they are very good at their job: about half of the sandy seafloor is thought to have passed through  the digestive tract of a sea cucumber.So next time you’re rejoicing  in the feeling of sand crunching between your toes,  consider this: those very grains of sand might have,  at one point or another, been excreted by a pickle  that breathes through its butt.