@summary
for billions of people, seafood provides a significant source of protein and nutrition, but over half the seafood we eat isn't caught in the wild, it's grown through aquaculture. farmed seafood is one of the fastest-growing food industries, but the farming methods echo the problems we've seen in industrial agriculture. is there a way to sustainably farm the ocean? ayana elizabeth johnson and megan davis investigate. [directed by biljana labovic, narrated by alexandra panzer].
@article
For 3 billion people around the world, seafood provides a significant source  of protein and nutrition. But recent studies show that 33% of wild  fisheries are overfished, while another 60% are fished at their  maximum capacity. In fact, over half the seafood we eat– from finfish and shellfish to  seaweed and algae– isn’t caught in the wild. It’s grown through aquaculture,  or aquatic farming. Farmed seafood is one of the  fastest growing food industries, expanding in volume by 5.8% each year. But different methods of aquaculture come  with different advantages and issues– some of which echo the serious problems  we’ve seen in industrial agriculture. So how can we avoid repeating the mistakes we’ve made on land, at sea? What aquaculture approaches are we  currently using, and what does a sustainable way  to farm the ocean really look like?One of the most common aquaculture  methods involves large pens made of nets, where fish are farmed offshore in floating cages roughly 1000 square meters in size. Commonly employed off the coast of Chile and in the fjords of Norway, these fish, like many industrially  farmed animals, occupy stressful, overcrowded pens. They produce massive amounts of waste, polluting the surrounding areas and potentially spreading diseases to wild species. Worse still, since the antibiotics  employed to fight disease aren’t fully absorbed by the fish, they get excreted back  into the environment. Net pens are also susceptible to escapes, unleashing huge numbers of fish which  compete for resources and weaken the local gene pool  with genes adapted for captivity. Escaped fish can even disrupt local  ecosystems as invasive species.Other techniques, such as man made coastal ponds commonly used for shrimp farming in Southeast Asia, create additional environmental problems. Just like net pens, these ponds are prone to spreading pollution and disease. Their construction also frequently  destroys important ecosystems like mangroves and marshes, which protect coastal areas from storms, provide habitats, and absorb tons  of greenhouse gases.One way to solve these problems is to farm fish on land in completely contained systems. Tanks and raceways can recirculate and  filter water to prevent pollution. But even fully contained facilities still  contend with another major hurdle: fishmeal. About 10% of the seafood caught globally is used to feed animals, including carnivorous farmed fish. Researchers are working on fish feed made  of insects and plant based proteins, but for now many inland fish farms  are connected to overfishing.All these obstacles can make sustainable  aquaculture feel a long way off, but innovative farmers are finding new  ways to responsibly farm the seas. The most promising solution of all  may be to look lower on the food chain. Instead of cramming large, carnivorous  fish into pens, we can work with natural ocean systems to produce huge amounts of shellfish  and seaweeds. These low maintenance flora and fauna  don’t need to be fed at all. In fact, they naturally improve  water quality, filtering it as they feed off of sunlight  and nutrients in the seawater. By absorbing carbon through  photosynthesis, these farms help battle climate change, and reduce local ocean acidification while creating habitats for other  species to thrive.Shifting to restorative ocean farming could provide good jobs for  coastal communities, and support healthy plant and  shellfish based diets that have an incredibly  low carbon footprint. In just 5 months, 4,000 square meters of ocean can  produce 25 tons of seaweed and 250,000 of shellfish. With the right distribution network, a series of small farms, collectively  the size of Washington State could feed the planet. Farms like these are already popping up around the globe, and a new generation of farmers is  stepping up to pursue a more sustainable future. Done properly, regenerative ocean farming could play a vital role in helping our oceans, our climate, and ourselves.