@summary
2,300 years ago, the rulers of alexandria set out to fulfill an audacious goal: to collect all the knowledge in the world under one roof. in its prime, the library of alexandria housed an unprecedented number of scrolls and attracted some of the greek world's greatest minds. but by the end of the 5th century ce, it had vanished. elizabeth cox details the rise and fall of this great building. [ted-ed animation by inna phillimore]
@article
2,300 years ago, the rulers of Alexandria  set out to fulfill one of humanity’s most audacious goals: to collect all the knowledge in the world  under one roof. In its prime, the Library of Alexandria housed  an unprecedented number of scrolls and attracted some of  the Greek world’s greatest minds. But by the end of the 5th century CE, the great library had vanished. Many believed it was destroyed  in a catastrophic fire. The truth of the library’s rise  and fall is much more complex.The idea for the library came  from Alexander the Great. After establishing himself as a conqueror, the former student of Aristotle  turned his attention to building an empire of knowledge  headquartered in his namesake city. He died before construction began, but his successor, Ptolemy I, executed Alexander’s plans  for a museum and library.Located in the royal district of the city, the Library of Alexandria may have been built  with grand Hellenistic columns, native Egyptian influences, or a unique blend of the two—there are  no surviving accounts of its architecture. We do know it had lecture halls,  classrooms, and, of course, shelves. As soon as the building was complete, Ptolemy I began to fill it with primarily Greek and Egyptian scrolls. He invited scholars to live  and study in Alexandria at his expense. The library grew as they contributed  their own manuscripts, but the rulers of Alexandria still wanted  a copy of every book in the world.Luckily, Alexandria was a hub for ships traveling through the Mediterranean. Ptolemy III instituted a policy requiring  any ship that docked in Alexandria to turn over its books for copying. Once the Library’s scribes  had duplicated the texts, they kept the originals  and sent the copies back to the ships. Hired book hunters also scoured  the Mediterranean in search of new texts, and the rulers of Alexandria attempted  to quash rivals by ending all exports of the Egyptian  papyrus used to make scrolls.These efforts brought hundreds  of thousands of books to Alexandria. As the library grew, it became possible to find information  on more subjects than ever before, but also much more difficult to find  information on any specific subject. Luckily, a scholar named Callimachus of Cyrene set to work on a solution, creating the pinakes, a 120 volume catalog  of the library’s contents, the first of its kind.Using the pinakes, others were able to navigate  the Library’s swelling collection. They made some astounding discoveries. 1,600 years before Columbus set sail, Eratosthenes not only realized  the earth was round, but calculated its circumference  and diameter within a few miles of their actual size. Heron of Alexandria created  the world’s first steam engine over a thousand years before it was finally reinvented during  the Industrial Revolution. For about 300 years after its founding  in 283 BCE, the library thrived.But then, in 48 BCE, Julius Caesar  laid siege to Alexandria and set the ships in the harbor on fire. For years, scholars believed the library  burned as the blaze spread into the city. It's possible the fire destroyed  part of the sprawling collection, but we know from ancient writings that scholars continued to visit  the library for centuries after the siege. Ultimately, the library slowly disappeared as the city changed from Greek, to Roman, Christian, and eventually Muslim hands. Each new set of rulers viewed  its contents as a threat rather than a source of pride. In 415 CE, the Christian rulers even had  a mathematician named Hypatia murdered for studying  the library’s ancient Greek texts, which they viewed as blasphemous.Though the Library of Alexandria  and its countless texts are long gone, we’re still grappling  with the best ways to collect, access, and preserve our knowledge. There’s more information available today and more advanced technology  to preserve it, though we can’t know for sure that our digital archives  will be more resistant to destruction than Alexandria’s ink and paper scrolls. And even if our reservoirs of knowledge  are physically secure, they will still have to resist  the more insidious forces that tore the library apart: fear of knowledge, and the arrogant belief  that the past is obsolete. The difference is that, this time,  we know what to prepare for.