@summary
the coldest materials in the world aren't in antarctica or at the top of mount everest. they're in physics labs: clouds of gases held just fractions of a degree above absolute zero. lina marieth hoyos explains how temperatures this low give scientists a window into the inner workings of matter, and allow engineers to build incredibly sensitive instruments that tell us more about the universe. [ted-ed animation by adriatic animation] 
@article
The coldest materials in the world  aren’t in Antarctica. They’re not at the top of Mount Everest or buried in a glacier. They’re in physics labs: clouds of gases held just fractions of a degree above absolute zero. That’s 395 million times colder  than your refrigerator, 100 million times colder  than liquid nitrogen, and 4 million times colder than outer space. Temperatures this low give scientists a window into the inner workings of matter, and allow engineers to build  incredibly sensitive instruments that tell us more about everything from our exact position on the planet to what’s happening in  the farthest reaches of the universe.How do we create such  extreme temperatures? In short, by slowing down  moving particles. When we’re talking about temperature, what we’re really talking about is motion. The atoms that make up solids, liquids, and gases are moving all the time. When atoms are moving more rapidly, we perceive that matter as hot. When they’re moving more slowly, we perceive it as cold.To make a hot object  or gas cold in everyday life, we place it in a colder environment,  like a refrigerator. Some of the atomic motion in the hot object is transferred to the surroundings, and it cools down. But there’s a limit to this: even outer space is too warm to create ultra low temperatures. So instead, scientists figured out a way  to slow the atoms down directly – with a laser beam.Under most circumstances, the energy in a laser beam  heats things up. But used in a very precise way, the beam’s momentum can stall  moving atoms, cooling them down. That’s what happens in a device  called a magneto optical trap. Atoms are injected into a vacuum chamber, and a magnetic field  draws them towards the center. A laser beam aimed  at the middle of the chamber is tuned to just the right frequency that an atom moving towards it will absorb a photon of the laser beam and slow down. The slow down effect comes from the transfer of momentum between the atom and the photon. A total of six beams,  in a perpendicular arrangement, ensure that atoms traveling  in all directions will be intercepted. At the center, where the beams intersect, the atoms move sluggishly,  as if trapped in a thick liquid — an effect the researchers who invented it  described as “optical molasses.” A magneto optical trap like this can cool atoms down  to just a few microkelvins — about  273 degrees Celsius.This technique was developed in the 1980s, and the scientists  who'd contributed to it won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1997 for the discovery. Since then, laser cooling has been  improved to reach even lower temperatures.But why would you want  to cool atoms down that much? First of all, cold atoms can make very good detectors. With so little energy, they’re incredibly sensitive  to fluctuations in the environment. So they’re used in devices that find  underground oil and mineral deposits, and they also make  highly accurate atomic clocks, like the ones used  in global positioning satellites.Secondly, cold atoms hold  enormous potential for probing the frontiers of physics. Their extreme sensitivity  makes them candidates to be used to detect gravitational waves  in future space based detectors. They’re also useful for the study  of atomic and subatomic phenomena, which requires measuring incredibly  tiny fluctuations in the energy of atoms. Those are drowned out  at normal temperatures, when atoms speed around  at hundreds of meters per second. Laser cooling can slow atoms to just  a few centimeters per second— enough for the motion caused by atomic quantum effects to become obvious. Ultracold atoms have already  allowed scientists to study phenomena like Bose Einstein condensation, in which atoms are cooled almost  to absolute zero and become a rare new state of matter.So as researchers continue in their quest  to understand the laws of physics and unravel the mysteries of the universe, they’ll do so with the help  of the very coldest atoms in it.