@summary
your hands, up close, are anything but smooth. with peaks and valleys, folds and rifts, there are plenty of hiding places for a virus to stick. if you then touch your face, the virus can infect you. but there are two extraordinarily simple ways you can keep that from happening: soap and water, and hand sanitizer. so which is better? alex rosenthal and pall thordarson investigate. [directed by artrake studio, narrated by addison anderson].
@article
Your hands, up close,  are anything but smooth. With peaks and valleys, folds and rifts, there are plenty of hiding places  for a virus to stick. If you then touch your face,  the virus can infect you. But there are two extraordinarily simple  ways you can keep that from happening: soap and water, and hand sanitizer. So which is better?The coronavirus that causes COVID 19 is one of many viruses whose protective outer surface is made of a lipid bilayer. These lipids are pin shaped molecules  whose heads are attracted to water, and tails are repulsed by it. So in water rich environments,  lipids naturally form a shell like this, with the heads outside  and the tails inside. Their shared reaction to water makes  the lipids stick loosely together— this is called the hydrophobic effect. This outer structure helps the molecular machinery of the virus break through cellular membranes  and hijack our cells. But it has thousands upon thousands  of weak points where the right molecules  could pry it apart.And this is where soap comes in. A single drop of any brand of soap  contains quadrillions of molecules called amphiphiles,  which resemble biological lipids. Their tails, which are similarly repulsed by water, compete for space with the lipids  that make up the virus’s shell. But they’re just different enough to break up the regularity of the virus’s membrane, making the whole thing come crashing down. Those amphiphiles then form bubbles  of their own around particles including the virus’s RNA and proteins. Apply water, and you’ll wash  that whole bubble away.Hand sanitizers work less like a crowbar,  and more like an earthquake. When you surround a coronavirus  with water, the hydrophobic effect gives the bonds  within the membrane their strength. That same effect also holds  the big proteins that form coronavirus’s spikes in place and in the shape that enables  them to infect your cells. If you dry the virus out in air,  it keeps its stability. But now surround it  with a high concentration of an alcohol, like the ethanol or isopropanol found  in most hand sanitizers. This makes the hydrophobic  effect disappear, and gives the molecules room  to move around. The overall effect is like removing all  of the nails and mortar from a house and then hitting it with an earthquake. The cell’s membrane collapses  and those spike proteins crumble.In either method, the actual process  of destroying the virus happens in just a second or two. But doctors recommend at least  20 seconds of hand washing because of the intricate landscape  that is your hand. Soap and sanitizer need to get everywhere, including your palms, fingertips, the outsides of your hands,  and between your fingers, to protect you properly.And when it comes to a  coronavirus outbreak, doctors recommend washing your hands with soap and water whenever possible. Even though both approaches are similarly  effective at killing the virus, soap and water has two benefits: first it washes away any dirt which  could otherwise hide virus particles. But more importantly, it’s simply easier to fully cover  your hands with soap and water for 20 seconds. Of course, hand sanitizer  is more convenient to use on the go. In the absence of a sink, use  the sanitizer as thoroughly as possible and rub your hands together  until they’re dry.Unfortunately, there are billions  of people who don’t have access  to clean drinking water, which is a huge problem at any time but especially during an outbreak. Researchers and aid groups are working to provide solutions for these communities. One example is a device that uses salt, water, and a car battery to make chlorinated water  that kills harmful pathogens and is safe for hand washing.So wherever possible, soap and water  are recommended for a coronavirus, but does that mean it's best  for every viral outbreak? Not necessarily. Many common colds are caused  by rhinoviruses that have a geometric protein structure called a capsid instead of a lipid membrane. The capsid doesn't have nearly  as many weak points where soap amphiphiles can pry it apart, so it takes longer  for soap to be effective. However some of its surface  proteins are still vulnerable to the destabilizing effect  of hand sanitizer. In this and similar cases, hand sanitizer may be more effective, especially if you then wash  your hands to remove residual particles. The best way to know  which to use for any given outbreak is to do what's best  for all things illness related: follow the advice  of accredited medical professionals.