@summary
insulin pumps improve the lives of millions of people with diabetes around the world by monitoring blood sugar, delivering insulin, and preventing the need for constant finger-pricking. but there's a catch: they're temporary. and it's not only insulin pumps that have this problem, but all bodily implants. why is that? kaitlyn sadtler details how our immune system reacts to foreign bodies. [directed by andrew foerster, narrated by bethany cutmore-scott].
@article
Insulin pumps improve the lives of many of the 415 million people  with diabetes around the world by monitoring blood sugar, delivering  insulin, and preventing the need for constant  finger pricking and blood testing. These small machines include a pump and a needle, which can sense glucose levels, feed back to the pump, and then calculate how much insulin  to deliver through the needle. But they have a catch: they’re temporary. Within a few days, glucose sensors have to be moved and replaced. And it’s not just glucose monitors and  insulin pumps that have this problem, but all bodily implants,  at different time scales. Plastic prosthetic knees have to be  replaced after about 20 years. Other implants, such as those used for  cosmetic reasons, can meet the same fate in about 10. That isn’t just a nuisance: it  can be expensive and risky.This inconvenience happens because of  our bodies’ immune systems. Honed by several hundred million  years of evolution, these defensive fronts have become exceptionally good  at identifying foreign objects. Our immune systems boast an impressive arsenal of tools to tackle, intercept, and destroy anything they believe shouldn’t be there. But the consequence of this constant  surveillance is that our bodies treat helpful  implants, like insulin pumps, with the same suspicion as they would a harmful virus or bacteria.As soon as the insulin pump has been  implanted in the skin, its presence triggers what’s known as a “foreign body response.” This starts with free floating proteins that stick themselves to the surface  of the implant. Those proteins include antibodies, which attempt to neutralize the new object and send out a signal that calls other  immune cells to the site to strengthen the attack.Early responding inflammatory cells, like neutrophils and macrophages, respond to the emergency call. Neutrophils release little granules filled with enzymes that try to break down the surface  of the insulin pump’s needle. Macrophages secrete enzymes too, together with nitric oxide radicals, which create a chemical reaction that  degrades the object over time. If the macrophages are unable to dispatch  the foreign body rapidly, they fuse together, forming a mass of  cells called a “giant cell.” At the same time, cells called fibroblasts travel to the site and begin to deposit layers of dense connective tissue. Those enclose the needle that the pump  uses to deliver insulin and test for glucose levels. Over time this scaffolding builds up, forming a scar around the implant.The scar functions as an almost  impenetrable wall that might start to block vital  interactions between the body and the implant. For example, scarring around pacemakers can interrupt the electrical transmission that’s  crucial for their functioning. Synthetic knee joints may give off  particles as they’re worn down, causing immune cells to inflame  around these fragments. Tragically, the immune system’s attack can even be life threatening.However, researchers are finding ways  to trick the immune system into accepting the new devices we  introduce into our bodily tissues. We’ve discovered that coating implants  with certain chemicals and drugs can dampen the immune response. Those basically make the implants  invisible to the immune system. We’re also making more implants  out of natural materials and in forms that directly mimic tissues, so that the body launches a weaker attack than it would if it came across a  completely artificial implant. Some medical treatments involve implants designed to regenerate lost  or damaged tissues. In those cases, we can design the implants to contain ingredients that will release specific signals, and carefully tailor our bodies’ immune reactions.In the future, this way of working alongside the immune system could help us develop completely  artificial organs, totally integrative prostheses, and self healing wound therapies. These treatments might one day  revolutionize medicine– and transform, forever,  the bodies we live in.